Correlithm Object Technology
P. Nick Lawrence, Ph.D.
Correlithm Publications
Dallas, Texas
Correlithm Publications
A Division of Lawrence Technologies, LLC
CORRELITHM OBJECT TECHNOLOGY
COPYRIGHT © 2004 by Lawrence Technologies, LLC. All rights
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of
this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system, without the
prior written permission of the publisher.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
ISBN 0-9752761-1-5
This book was produced in Times New Roman.
The cover was designed by Constance L. Wisber.
Lightning Press, Inc. was printer and binder.
http://www.LT.com
For Monty, who believed,
 and
Connie, who knew.
Correlithm Object Technology
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE XI
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS XIII
CHAPTER I OVERVIEW 1
A Short Summary 2
What Good Are CO Systems? 3
How the Brain Works 6
The Problem 6
The Solution 6
CHAPTER II UNIT N-CUBES 9
Distances in Unit N-Cubes 9
Summary of Distances 12
Properties of Unit N-Cubes 14
Unfamiliar Geometry 15
Additional Perspectives 20
CHAPTER III PROBABILITY AND INFORMATION 25
Summary 26
Distribution of Distances 27
Probability of Proximity 28
Information Content of Proximity 31
Point Capacity 32
vi Correlithm Object Technology
CHAPTER IV ELEMENTS OF CORRELITHM OBJECT
COMPUTING 37
Spaces 39
Points 41
Soft Tokens 42
Rules 47
Strings 49
Sensors and Actors 52
Systems 53
Miscellaneous 54
CHAPTER V CORRELITHM OBJECT MACHINES 57
Definition of a Correlithm Object Machine 59
Building a New State Point 61
Cell Form of Rule 63
Target Cell Independence 63
Dimensions Appearing in Multiple Rules 64
CHAPTER VI COMPLETENESS 69
Logical “NOT” 70
Logical Completeness 71
Logical “NAND” 71
No Perceptron Limitations 73
Logical “XOR” 73
Turing Completeness 75
Flip-Flop 75
Table of Contents vii
CHAPTER VII STRINGS 79
String Concepts 80
Approximate Relative Location 85
Ordinality 90
Higher Dimensions 91
Comments 96
CHAPTER VIII ARCHITECTURE 97
Serial Implementations 99
Concurrent Implementations 100
Analog Implementations 105
Properties and Capabilities 108
Sampling 109
Superposition 111
Statistical “Holograms” 113
Straddlers 118
CHAPTER IX CONVERTERS 119
Cardinal Converters 120
Continuous Converters 122
Ordinal Converters 125
Higher Dimensional Converters 127
Converter Form 128
viii Correlithm Object Technology
CHAPTER X MECHANISMS OF BEHAVIOR 131
Turing Completeness 134
Soft Tokens 135
Robustness 137
Superposition 139
Strings 141
Patterns and Functions 142
Rule Pathways 143
Grammar Systems 145
Parse Trees 145
Generation Trees 147
Ladders 149
Automata 152
State Machines 153
Stack Machines 154
Generic Stack Machines 156
Expert Systems 160
Continuous Systems 163
Functional Relationships 163
Differential Equations 169
Feedback Control Systems 170
Artificial Neural Networks 171
Fuzzy Logic 172
Internal Control 174
Learning 175
Mind 178
Table of Contents ix
CHAPTER XI DIRECTIONS 181
Why CO Technology Will Succeed 181
Why CO Technology Was Not Discovered Sooner 182
Summary of Characteristics 184
The Correlithm Object 184
Soft Tokens 184
String COs 184
Robustness 184
Sampling 185
Superposition 185
Straddlers 185
Statistical “Holograms” 185
Virtual Systems 186
Continuous Systems 186
General Purpose Analog Computers 186
Early Applications 186
Enhancing Current Systems 186
Cueing 187
Data Mining 187
Data Fusion 187
Speech 187
Natural Language 188
Vision 188
Handwriting 188
Simple Robots 188
Security 188
The Future 189
Tools 189
Learning 190
Quantum Information Systems 191
Ensembles 192
Conclusions 194
x Correlithm Object Technology
APPENDIX I DERIVATION OF UNIT N-CUBE DISTANCES
 197
Random Point to Random Point 197
The Problem 197
The Solution 197
Random Point to Midpoint 200
The Problem 200
The Solution 200
Random Point to Corner 200
The Problem 200
The Solution 201
APPENDIX II CORRELITHM OBJECTS AND
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY 203
Overview 203
Representing Information 203
Storing Information 204
A Closer Look 206
Manipulating Information 209
Conclusion 210
GLOSSARY 211
INDEX 221
Correlithm Object Technology
xi
Preface
The goal of this book is to present Correlithm Object Technology in
a way that is accessible to a wide audience. I believe that this goal
has been met. College students, and even advanced high school
students, have successfully assimilated this material. Certainly
anyone with a technical degree should have no trouble. Chapters II
through X each begin with a general summary that describes the
importance and the key results of the chapter and requires very little
technical knowledge. Casual readers should read Chapter I, the
summaries from Chapter II through Chapter X, and Chapter XI.
It has been suggested that this material is “difficult.” I submit that
the concepts are not difficult so much as unfamiliar. Most of us are
not accustomed to dealing with geometry in more than two or three
dimensions, yet the properties that are important here do not really
exist in spaces with less than about twenty dimensions. The material
is interdisciplinary, requiring concepts from mathematics, computer
science, electrical engineering and several other areas. Even so, I
believe that the book is reasonably self-contained because most of
the necessary background material is provided. Careful and attentive
reading will be well rewarded.
The book is laid out in a systematic manner. Chapters I and XI
provide summary material, and later chapters build on earlier ideas.
Chapter I provides a general overview and some background
material. Chapter II presents the key concepts required from the
statistics of bounded, high-dimensional spaces. Chapter III develops
many of the useful mathematical relationships about these concepts.
Chapter IV presents the correlithm object (CO) computing paradigm
and some important terminology. Chapter V provides a model of the
formal computing machine which is implied by the CO computing
paradigm. Chapter VI shows that CO systems are Turing complete,
i.e., that they can compute anything that can be computed. Chapter
VII extends the concept of the CO from points to higher-order
objects, such as lines, surfaces and volumes, greatly expanding the
xii Correlithm Object Technology
capabilities of the model. Chapter VIII introduces some of the
unique properties of CO computing systems, including robustness,
sampling, superposition and holographic-like characteristics.
Chapter IX discusses how to move real-world data into and out of
CO systems. Chapter X contains the material that I find most
interesting, namely the unique behavior inherent in CO systems.
Finally, Chapter XI summarizes the results and proposes some
future directions. Appendix I presents derivations of some key
properties of unit N-cubes. Appendix II outlines my theory of how
information is represented, stored and manipulated in living neural
systems. This is a detailed, testable model that I believe deserves
investigation in the neurophysiology lab.
The ramifications of CO technology are vast. There are implications
and opportunities in nearly every aspect of every field of endeavor.
Indeed, everyone who has endeavored to understand this material
has been stimulated by the way that understanding has produced
new insights, new directions for research and development, and
seemingly endless ideas for applications and commercialization. The
principal intellectual property rights are owned by Lawrence
Technologies, LLC (www.LT.com), which is focused on developing
CO technology in every conceivable way. Please visit the web site
for more information.
Several commercial applications have already emerged from CO
technology. Syngence, LLC (www.syngence.com), utilizes licensed
CO technology to provide unique data mining capabilities to the
legal profession. CDX Gas, LLC (www.cdxgas.com), has been
developing applications of licensed CO technology in several areas
of its natural resources business. Feasibility has been demonstrated
for applications in areas that include telecom, computer security, and
intelligence work.
Some of this work was funded in part by the United States Air Force
under contract numbers F30602-02-C-0077 and F30602-03-C-0051.
Acknowledgements xiii
Acknowledgements
First, I must reach back in time to thank Warren McCullough,
Murray Eden, and Jerome Lettvin from my days at MIT, for many
interesting and stimulating conversations when correlithm object
technology was embryonic.
I have bent the ears of many people over the years, far too many to
try to list, but know that I am grateful to each of you.
Many people have contributed directly to this effort. Monty Rial, Dr.
Eustace Winn, Steve Clary, Ray Davis, and Phil Whisenhunt
provided significant financial support. Doug Matzke, Ph.D.,
Chandler Burgess, Ken Loafman, Steve Benno, Katrina Riehl, and
Zack Loafman made important technical contributions. Bryan
Aldridge and Mike Lockerd both made important contributions in
other areas. Merrill Nunnally provided editorial review of the
manuscript.
I particularly want to thank my wife, Connie. The fine graphic
artwork in this book is hers. I would be very grateful even if that
were her only contribution, but without her confidence,
encouragement, and persistence behind me, it is hard to imagine that
this book, not to mention correlithm object technology itself, would
ever have seen the light of day.
Nick Lawrence
April 2004
Correlithm Object Technology
1
Chapter I Overview
Correlithm object technology lets you build systems that behave
more like living organisms than machines. It is based on my
discovery of remarkable and unexpected statistical properties of
bounded, high-dimensional geometrical spaces. It offers capabilities
quite distinct from those of traditional computing systems and opens
many new directions for science, engineering and applications
development.
The author coined the term, “correlithm,” around 1975. Here is the
definition:
cor-re-lithm (cor'e lith'em) n. [[comb CORRELATION + ALGORITHM]]
1 Math. any systematic method for solving problems by using similarities to
known examples.
2 Comput. an algorithm primarily based on the use of characterizing
examples.
--cor're-lith'mic adj.
Correlithm object technology is a computing paradigm. It is
designed around an unusual means for representing information
called a correlithm object, or “CO.” We derived COs from
observations of living neural systems. We believe that COs are the
primary data tokens in these systems, where they are central to
essentially all high-level data representation, storage and
manipulation. We believe that to understand a living neural system
as an information processing system, one must understand CO
technology.
However, this is not a book about the science of neurons. It is a
book about using COs to engineer unique information processing
systems. COs are important mathematical objects of the statistics of
bounded, high-dimensional spaces. Whether or not we are right
about the role or even the existence of COs in living neurons is
irrelevant here. We are focusing on the nature of COs and what we
can do with them.
2 Correlithm Object Technology
A Short Summary
For those of you who are asking, “What is this all about,” here is a
very short summary of a complex subject.
Consider a list of N real numbers. Suppose each was independently
selected at random in the range zero to one, with all values equally
likely. The list can be interpreted as the coordinates of a random
point in a unit N-cube. Suppose we pick two such points. The
distance between them can be found from the Pythagorean theorem
in N dimensions. The statistics of these distances assures us that two
points will almost certainly not be close together by accident. In
fact, points that we select at random will all be about the same
distance from each other, if N is no smaller than twenty or so
dimensions. This result is very counter-intuitive to most people,
which may explain why it is not well known.
The volume of a unit N-cube is vast. To gain some intuition about
this, suppose we only allow two possible values for each of the N
coordinates. Then we can form 2N points. If N is twenty, which is
pretty much the minimum useful value for N, then there are over one
million points. If N is fifty, a more typical value, then there are over
one million billion points. We can select many more than two values
from the real unit line. In fact, there is no limit to the number that we
can select if we use real numbers. Suppose we select ten values.
Suppose we change N to one hundred, which is a common choice in
this work. Then the number of points is one followed by one
hundred zeroes, which is commonly called one googol in
mathematics. There are far less than one googol particles in the
known universe.
This vastness is important. Suppose a process produces a known
point in an N-cube. Suppose we are given a test point and asked
whether that process or a random process produced it. The answer
depends on the distance between the known point and the test point.
Because an N-cube is vast, random points are all about the same
distance apart. If the two points are about that distance apart, the test
point is probably random. If they are close together, the process
probably produced the test point, because the vastness makes it
Chapter I Overview 3
extremely unlikely for two points to be close by accident. The small
separation is probably due to slight variations or “noise” in the
process itself. This is a key principle of correlithm object
technology.
Points in an N-cube can be used as data tokens. Each known point
is, in effect, a “statistical landmark.” Because of the vastness of Ncubes, a randomly selected point will almost never be near any
previously selected point. Points from unrelated processes will not
be close together. It is almost certain that only points arising from
the same underlying process will ever be close together. This means
that we can use a point generated by a particular process as a data
token that robustly represents that process.
Mapping these data tokens among themselves turns out to be a
general-purpose computational paradigm. These mappings can
compute literally anything. Processing information in this way
produces behaviors more like those found in living creatures than
machines.
We will explore these concepts in great detail in this book. We will
begin with the properties of random points and unit N-cubes,
develop some useful formulas and nomenclature, discuss how
information processing is done with these constructs, show that the
computing paradigm is general-purpose, then describe some of the
unique capabilities and characteristics of systems built in this way.
By the time you have reached the end of the book, we think you will
agree with us that correlithm object technology holds tremendous
promise for the future.
What Good Are CO Systems?
The information processing characteristics of traditional computers
and living organisms are remarkably different.
Computers are typically precise, fast, and brittle. A computer will
almost never make a mistake adding a million ten-digit numbers,
and some of today’s computers will get the answer in a fraction of a
second. But clip one wire inside the computer or change one
4 Correlithm Object Technology
instruction in its memory, and the computer not only will fail to get
the right answer, it may not work at all. Computers do not fail
“gracefully” and do not inherently work well with data that contains
noise.
Living organisms are typically imprecise, slow and flexible. A living
creature copes very well with data that is ambiguous and full of
noise. Its “hardware” is incredibly reliable: loss of a few neurons is
not at all critical to the overall behavior of the creature. It is “slow”
only when one does not look closely at what is going on in the
neurons. The information processing that must take place when a
cheetah chases a gazelle, including such things as visual analysis,
muscle coordination, modeling of dynamics, planning and so forth is
quite extensive, if very different from the task of adding a million
ten-digit numbers. Yet it happens very quickly.
CO systems exhibit many of the behaviors of living organisms.
These behaviors are not “designed into” CO systems. Rather, they
emerge as characteristics of CO systems. This is strong evidence
that CO systems indeed capture the essence of information
processing in living creatures. The proof of these assertions is begun
in the body of this book. We believe that their truth will be apparent
to anyone who studies this material in depth, and self-evident in the
behavior of most CO system implementations.
The correlithm object is a new and useful tool. It adds new
dimensions to more familiar computing paradigms, including expert
systems, artificial neural networks, fuzzy logic, and so forth, and to
more general topics such as pattern recognition and artificial
intelligence. It provides a framework for data representation that is
absent from these traditional approaches and can readily and
usefully be added to any of them.
CO systems capture similarity. They “see and do things like things
previously seen and done.” A specific pattern or behavior can
provide a prototype or template that enables a range of recognitions
or actions that are similar.
Chapter I Overview 5
CO system implementations can be very robust. A single system can
be “spread” across many computing resources, such as internet
nodes. Conceptually, think of putting several “brain cells” in each of
a large number of computers and letting the network provide the
communications. Or consider creating a “group mind” that extends
across a swarm of robotic insects. Loss of even significant numbers
of the distributed computing resources will not normally result in
failure of the spread system. In this sense, CO systems have a
significant “holographic” nature.
The potential applications for CO systems are very broad. To find
one, find a situation where a living creature currently does a better
job at processing information than a traditional computer. This could
be something as simple as making a robot walk or as complex as
analyzing scientific data. For example, traditionally designed robotic
systems have been sent to Mars. These have been very fragile
systems quite prone to failure. In the late 1990s, a Mars robot was
moved only fractions of an inch every few hours, the time required
for radio signals to be sent back to earth, analyzed and instructions
sent to Mars. Workers were very afraid that the robot would get
“stuck.” Can you imagine a robot with the capabilities of a lowly
roach getting stuck? How about one with the capabilities of a cat?
Can you see a cat getting stuck in a big “kitty litter” box?
In another direction, CO systems have proved to be very useful as
“cueing systems” for human experts. Appropriate CO systems can
direct an expert’s attention to what are potentially the most
productive areas of focus. CO systems have been built in areas as
diverse as petroleum exploration, legal discovery, medical imagery
and network security.
We believe that CO technology will become important in many
fields. Some of them may be surprising. Anywhere an appropriate
“ensemble” is found, correlithm objects will emerge. In
neurophysiology and psychology, the ensemble is a set of neurons.
In Quantum Information Science, the ensemble is comprised of
qubits and ebits. There may even be applications in the modeling of
sociological behavior, where the ensemble is made up of individuals
6 Correlithm Object Technology
and the correlithm objects describe social groupings and shared
opinions. Ensembles are found in so many places that we think it
would be a mistake for any technical worker to remain unaware of
CO technology.
How the Brain Works
Here is a short overview of the neurophysiological ideas that led to
correlithm object technology.
The Problem
How is information represented, stored and manipulated in living
neural systems? How can we use these methods to build systems
that have the unique properties found in living neural systems? We
are not interested so much in the “science of neurons,” but in the
high-level information processing capabilities and characteristics
possessed by ensembles of neurons.
The Solution
Every living neuron puts out pulses that vary with time. In order to
understand how groups of neurons handle information, we believe
that the pulse rate of the neuron should be the focus, not the
conditions that create an individual pulse. The pulse rate varies
continuously from about zero pulses per second to some fixed
maximum rate. For convenience, we normalize the pulse rate to be a
real number between zero, the minimum pulse rate, and one, the
maximum.
A set or “ensemble” of neurons has a “state” at any point in time
that can be expressed as a list of the instantaneous pulse rates of all
of the neurons in the set. We can view this list as the coordinates of
a single point in a unit N-cube. As the state of the set of neurons
changes, the corresponding point moves.
Statistically, the points that represent state at two different times will
not lie close together by accident. If they do lie close together, then
they probably are not random. It is far more likely that both were
produced by slight variations of the same (perhaps unknown)
process.
Chapter I Overview 7
Living systems use the statistical properties of these high
dimensional points to robustly represent most of the information in
the systems. The state point represents the current state of a set of
neurons. Each neuron “watches” the state of some ensemble of
neurons. When the neuron “sees” an “important” state point, it pairs
it with its current output pulse rate and permanently stores the pair.
The storage is actually accomplished in the neuron’s input dendritic
tree by using properties of pseudopods, axonal membranes and the
statistics of correlithm objects. (See Appendix II.) This is how living
systems store most of their permanent information.
Living systems manipulate most of their information by using saved
pairs to guide the future behavior of each neuron. The neuron
“watches” its input for the state point to venture near one of these
saved state points, and when it does—and to the degree that it
does—the neuron adopts the paired pulse rate. The closer the state
point gets to the saved state point, the less noise is combined with
the save pulse rate to produce the neuron’s output pulse rate. If the
state point is not very close to the saved state point, the output pulse
rate may deviate a lot from the paired pulse rate. The deviation
drops toward zero as the state point closes in on the saved state
point.
A neuron watches the state point of some particular ensemble and
sets its output pulse rate accordingly. Suppose we have an ensemble
of these neurons. The output pulse rates of this ensemble can also be
interpreted as the coordinates of state point, with each neuron of the
ensemble contributing one coordinate value. In effect, a state point
from one neural ensemble produces a particular state point in
another ensemble. In other words, state points get mapped to state
points.
It is the statistical properties of these state points that make it
possible for living systems to process information as they do. These
correlithm objects are available in huge numbers, and they are
extremely robust. Correlithm objects are the one feature that truly
separates CO technology from all other computing paradigms.
Correlithm Object Technology
9
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes
Visualizing a cube that exceeds 20 dimensions tests
the imagination. That millions of random points
within that figure measure the same distance apart
within a very high degree of probability defies
common sense and intuition. As ironic as it sounds,
this extreme geometry results in an environment that
produces highly reliable uniform distances between
random points. The points, called correlithm objects,
act as data representatives to achieve computing
breakthroughs not possible in a four dimensional
universe.
Distances in Unit N-Cubes
Geometric probability1
 is the branch of mathematics that studies the
probabilities involved in geometric problems. We are interested here
in the probabilities of certain distances in real unit N-cubes.
A real unit N-cube is an N-dimensional cube whose edges all have
real unit length. Traditional geometry tells us that a unit N-cube has
2N corners, that the length of straight line between two maximally
distant or opposite corners (called the major diagonal) is N , and
that the length of a straight line from the center of the unit N-cube
(called the midpoint) to any corner is half of the major diagonal,
( ) 1 or 2 N N 4 .
The Hamming distance between two corners in a unit N-cube is
defined as the cumulative length of the minimum number of edges

1
 The most recent book on this subject is D. Klain, G. Rota, Introduction to
Geometric Probability, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
10 Correlithm Object Technology
that must be traversed to go from either corner to the other2
. The
Hamming distance between two opposite corners is N. The number
of corners that lie at a Hamming distance of h from a particular
corner is given by the binomial coefficients as the Combinations of
N things taken h at a time, or C(N,h).
What is the probability that two randomly selected corners of a unit
N-cube lie at a Hamming distance of h? Since there are 2N corners
and there are C(N,h) corners that lie at distance h from a given
corner, the probability is C(N,h)/2N. What is the expected Hamming
distance between two randomly selected corners? We know that the
mean of the binomial lies at h=N/2. Thus, N/2 is the expected
Hamming distance. Pentti Kanerva noted this geometric probability
in his book3
. He also showed that the standard deviation of this
expected Hamming distance is about N 2 .
What is the expected Cartesian distance between two randomly
selected corners? We have already implicitly used the Cartesian
distance above, for example to compute the length of the major
diagonal. The Cartesian distance is simply the length of a straight
line connecting two points, namely the square root of the sum of the
squares of the differences between the point’s coordinates in each
dimension. Since we know that the expected Hamming distance
between two such corners is N/2 and we know each edge has length
1, we can immediately obtain the expected Cartesian distance as
N 2 .
Unless otherwise noted in the following, “distance” will mean
Cartesian distance.
We will need the expected values of three other probabilistic
distances in the unit N-cube. Suppose we select a point at random
from the entire volume of the unit N-cube. To do this, we select an

2 More generally, the Hamming distance between two points in a unit N-cube can
be defined as the sum of the lengths of the straight lines that must be traversed in
each dimension to go from one point to the other.
3 Sparse Distributed Memory, Pentti Kanerva, MIT Press 1988, p.18.
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 11
independent uniformly distributed random number between 0.0 and
1.0 inclusive for each dimension. This set of N random numbers
forms the coordinates of the desired random point, which we will
call p1. Now we can ask what is the expected distance between p1
and the midpoint, between p1 and a randomly selected corner and
between p1 and another point, p2, similarly and independently
selected at random?
The answers to these questions are not immediately apparent. Exact
analytic solutions probably do not exist. In Appendix I we present a
derivational approach that gives us valuable expansions for all three
problems. The mathematics of this approach, however, is not very
accessible to many people. As an alternative, programs can be built
that simulate the processes and gather and report statistics. Novice
programmers can normally complete these simple programs.
The expected (Cartesian) distance between two points selected at
random from the entire unit N-cube (including its corners, surface
and volume) is approximately N 6 . We call this distance standard
distance for reasons that will be explained shortly. The standard
deviation of standard distance is approximately 7 120 or about
0.2415. Notice that the standard distance grows with N as one
might expect, but the standard deviation of standard distance is
independent of N. These are the two most important ideas to
understand. They are the foundation for correlithm object theory,
and they will recur many times and in many forms in what follows.
The expected distance between a point selected at random from the
entire unit N-cube and the midpoint is approximately N 12 . We
call this distance standard radius. The standard deviation of
standard radius is approximately 1 60 or about 0.1291.
The expected distance between a point selected at random from the
entire unit N-cube and any corner is N 3 . We call this distance
12 Correlithm Object Technology
the standard diameter. Its standard deviation is approximately
1 15 or about 0.2582.
Summary of Distances
We summarize these results in Table II-1. The headings specify the
properties and the first column classifies their type as either exact or
probabilistic. The Unit Edge columns present distance and
deviation. They are labeled Unit Edge to reflect the fact that in these
columns we require the edge of the N-cube to have unit length. For
some purposes, it is useful to require the standard radius to have unit
length. The last two columns, labeled Unit Radius, present the same
results as those of the Unit Edge columns, normalized by dividing
the elements of those columns by N 12 , the length of the standard
radius. In the Unit Radius columns, the Cartesian distances take on
an obvious and aesthetically pleasing simplicity. As far as we know
as of this writing, the results in this table have not previously been
published.
Under Unit Radius normalization, the exact geometrical distances
found in the Unit Edge normalization do not appear. The standard
radius is itself a statistical distance. If it is taken to be exactly 1 and
used for normalization, the exact geometrical distances necessarily
become approximate statistical distances.
The entries in the Unit Radius columns of Table II-1 that contain N
in the denominator of the radical all tend to zero as N grows large.
In the Unit Edge columns, these same entries are constants,
independent of N. Both normalizations tell the same, consistent
story but from different perspectives.
Note that standard diameter is in fact twice standard radius, but it is
also the distance between a random corner and a random point.
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 13
Cartesian
Distance
Standard
Deviation
Cartesian
Distance
Standard
Deviation
Type Unit Edge Unit Radius
Edge: length of side
Exact 1 0 ≈ 12 N ≈ 0
Major diagonal: maximum corner to corner distance
Exact N 0 ≈ 12 ≈ 0
Corner distance: random corner to random corner
Prob ≈ N / 2 ≈ 1/ 9 ≈ 6 ≈ 4 / 3N
Standard diameter: random corner to random point
Prob ≈ N / 3 ≈ 1/15 ≈ 4 ≈ 4 / 5N
Half diagonal: midpoint to random corner
Exact N / 4 0 ≈ 3 ≈ 0
Standard distance: random point to random point
Prob ≈ N / 6 ≈ 7 /120 ≈ 2 ≈ 7 /10N
Standard radius: midpoint to random point
Prob ≈ N /12 ≈ 1/ 60 1 ≈ 1 5N
Table II-1 Summary of Statistics for an N-Cube.
14 Correlithm Object Technology
Properties of Unit N-Cubes
A real unit N-cube (and more generally, any bounded N-space) has
properties that are unfamiliar to most of us. We are used to thinking
in three, or perhaps four dimensions. The approximations that we
are using here will not give good results in so few dimensions. The
terms that we have dropped in the expansions to arrive at these
approximations are not negligible for fewer than about N=20
dimensions. Table II-1, however, quickly becomes an accurate
summary as N grows beyond 20.
Let us examine Table II-1 more closely to try to understand its
important story and to gain some insight into the unfamiliar world of
the unit N-cube.
The ratio of standard distance to its standard deviation is about
20N / 7 . For ease of calculation, suppose N=35. Then this ratio is
10. Recalling that standard distance is the expected distance between
two randomly selected points, we see that random points in the unit
35-cube will be about the same distance apart the vast majority of
the time. In fact, finding random points p1 and p2 very close
together as compared to standard distance is a random event that is
on the order of 10 standard deviations from the norm! Such an event
is unlikely in the extreme. As N grows, this ratio grows with the
square root of N. We are driven to the extraordinary conclusion that
any two randomly chosen points in a unit N-cube of suitably large N
are essentially the same distance apart!
Certainly, in a unit N-cube, only N+1 points at a time can be
arranged so that each point is exactly the same distance from the
other points. In a unit square (a unit 2-cube), such an arrangement is
called an equilateral triangle. In an ordinary unit cube (a unit 3-
cube), we can arrange four points in a tetrahedron, and so forth to
higher dimensions. But the conclusion above is something different.
The conclusion says that points selected at random in a unit N-cube
(N≥20) will all be approximately the same distance apart. If you
select 55 points at random in a unit 54-cube and measure their
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 15
mutual distances, you will find that each distance is about
N / 6 = 54 6 = 9 = 3 units apart, where 1 unit is the length of
an edge of the unit N-cube, with a standard deviation of 0.2415. You
might find some distances as small as about 2.5 (two standard
deviations below the expected value), or you might find some as
large as about 3.5 (two above), but it would be increasingly rare to
find distances even further away from 3. If you select 1000 points at
random in a unit 54-cube, you will be more likely (because you have
more chances) to find some distances that are smaller than 2.5 or
larger than 3.5, but it will still be a rare event. The distribution of
these distances is Gaussian with a mean of 3 and a standard
deviation of about 0.2415.
Unfamiliar Geometry
It is important here to gain some intuition about the exact and
statistical geometry of unit N-cubes. To facilitate this discussion, we
define the following points: the midpoint, m; random points p and
q; random corners c and d; and o, the corner opposite c. It is not
possible to draw an N-cube for large N, but Figure II-1 represents
one schematically.
Bear in mind the statistical nature of the following discussion. The
points of a unit N-cube are infinite in number and homogeneous.
Explicit exceptions to any statistical statement we make here can be
found very easily. However, we are examining the expected
properties of randomly selected corners and points.
First, let us look at some triangles.
Triangle cdo has the major diagonal co and two equal legs, cd and
do. From Table II-1 we know that co has length N and each leg
has length ≈ N / 2 . Triangle cdo is a right triangle because the
length of co squared is N, which is the sum of N/2+N/2, the squares
of the lengths of the legs. In other words, any major diagonal such
as co is the hypotenuse of a right triangle formed by itself and any
random corner.
16 Correlithm Object Technology
M
d
o
q
p
m
c
Figure II-1 Schematic Representation of a unit N-cube with midpoint m,
random corner c, opposite corner o, any other random corner d, and two
random points, p and q, from the N-cube’s volume. The line segments are to
scale: mp = 1 , pq = 2 , mc = 3 , cp = 4 , cd = 6 and co = 12 .
Angles pmq, pmc, cmd, cdo and similar angles throughout the N-cube are all
right angles.
Triangle cmd connects two random corners c and d with the
midpoint m. Although line segment md is not shown in the figure, it
is clearly the same length as cm. Both cm and md are half diagonals
with length N / 4 each, while cd is the distance between random
corners, or ≈ N / 2 . Triangle cmd is a right triangle with the right
angle at the midpoint, because the square of the hypotenuse, N/2,
equals the sum of the squares of the legs, namely N/4+N/4. Thus,
any two random corners form a right triangle with the midpoint.
Triangle cmp is a right triangle. The length of cm is N / 4 , the
length of cp is ≈ N / 3 and the length of mp is ≈ N /12 . The
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 17
squares are N/4, N/3 and N/12 respectively. The hypotenuse is cp,
and N/3 equals N/4+N/12. Any random corner c and any random
point p form a right triangle with the midpoint m.
Triangle pmq is a right triangle. The lengths of pm and mq are both
≈ N /12 , and the length of pq is ≈ N / 6 . The hypotenuse is pq,
and N/6 equals N/12+N/12. Any two random points, p and q, form a
right triangle with the midpoint m.
Notice that all of these right triangles can be proved equally well
using the Unit Radius normalization. Triangle cdo:
( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2
12 = 6 + 6 . Triangle cmd: ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2
6 = 3 + 3 .
Triangle cmp: ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2
4 = 3 + 1 . Triangle pmq:
( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2
2 = 1 + 1 . Unit Radius normalization is more convenient
for many purposes than Unit Edge normalization.
Figure II-2 shows another schematic view of the unfamiliar
properties of the unit N-cube.
From the perspective of a particular randomly chosen corner c, we
can identify the opposite corner o. These two corners form the
“poles” on the axis of an N-sphere. Essentially all of the other
corners appear to lie on the equator of this N-sphere, and each of
these other corners is at the vertex of a right angle to the poles. Each
equatorial corner is essentially equally distant from all other
equatorial corners and from both poles. Thus, any two equatorial
corners form an equilateral triangle with either pole. The midpoint
of the N-cube lies at the center of the equatorial circle of corners,
halfway between the poles. From any corner, these same
relationships will be seen.
From the perspective of a particular point p chosen at random from
the volume of the N-cube, all corners appear to be equally distant,
and all corners appear to be the same distance apart. As seen from
p, all randomly chosen points q appear to be equally distant, and all
18 Correlithm Object Technology
such random points appear to be the same distance apart. The view
from any other randomly chosen point will be similar.
random points
corners
c m o
Figure II-2 Here is another schematic view of the unit N-cube. Again we
have midpoint m, random corner c and opposite corner o. From the
perspective of c, all corners appear to lie on the equator of an N-sphere of
radius 3 , and all random points from the N-cube’s volume appear to lie on
the equator of another N-sphere of radius 1 . All points in the corner
equator are about distance 6 apart, and all points in the random points
equator are about distance 2 apart.
From the perspective of the midpoint m, all corners are equally far
away and equally spaced. Similarly, all points are equally far away
and equally spaced.
Looking again from the perspective of a randomly chosen corner c,
we see that all randomly chosen points appear to lie in a ring on a
plane perpendicular to the major diagonal co that passes through the
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 19
midpoint m. Further, the distance between every pair of points in the
ring is about the same. This view is seen from any corner.
We remind the reader that we are dealing with randomly chosen
points and corners. The unit N-cube has a smooth, continuous
distribution of points. The geometrical properties we are describing
only occur as a result of selecting points and corners at random. It is
trivial to identify non-random points and corners where these
relationships do not hold, but that does not invalidate our statistical
results in any way. We are saying that if you select points and
corners at random as we describe, then these properties exist.
The right triangles we have found above provide a useful tool. If we
move the origin of our coordinates to the vertex of any right angle,
we can treat the resulting coordinates of any point in the N-cube as a
vector with respect to that origin. We know from vector analysis that
the inner product of any two vectors that form a right angle is zero.
The inner product is simply the sum of the products of paired
coordinates.
For example, consider two random points, p and q, together with the
midpoint m, called triangle pmq above. Up until now, we have been
assuming that one corner of the unit N-cube serves as the origin and
that all coordinates are positive between zero and one. Suppose
instead we choose the midpoint as the origin. Then the inner product
of the vectors p and q, namely p˙q, is approximately 0. In other
words, as seen from the midpoint, the vectors p and q are
approximately orthogonal. Any pair of points selected at random
from a unit N-cube has this property, which gives us a very large
pool of essentially orthogonal basis vectors. These vectors have
many uses.
These descriptions are all made from particular points of view. The
viewpoint of an observer is a recurring and useful theme in the
theory of correlithm objects.
20 Correlithm Object Technology
Additional Perspectives
Here are two additional images that may be useful in gaining
familiarity with these unfamiliar statistical properties of geometry.
The first is from the perspective of a randomly selected point. The
second is from the perspective of the midpoint of the N-cube.
Figure II-3 Here is the distribution of random points (inner sphere) and
corners (outer sphere), from the perspective of one randomly chosen point
(the point at the center). The radii are drawn to scale. The thicknesses of the
spheres reflect the standard deviations for both point distributions. These
thicknesses are drawn to scale for N=35. They go to zero thickness quickly as
N grows.
Figure II-3 shows a single randomly selected point surrounded by
two spheres, with a cutout to better show structure.
The inner sphere represents the volume of the unit N-cube sampled
by random points, and the outer sphere represents all corners. The
radii represent the expected distances from the central point to the
random points and to the corners respectively. The thicknesses of
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 21
the sphere represent the bounds of one standard deviation for each of
the expected distances. Bear in mind that if any point from the inner
sphere were placed at the center, the current center point would then
(probably) be found within the inner sphere. Thus from the
perspective of any random point in the unit N-cube, all other
points—and all corners—appear to lie at essentially constant
distances. Said another way, the essential geometry of a high
dimensional unit cube—in fact all high dimensional bounded
geometries—is an approximate N-hedron, where all points lie about
the same distance apart, an arrangement that approximates an Ndimensional tetrahedron.
Figure II-4 Here is the distribution of random points (inner sphere) and
corners (outer sphere), from the perspective of the midpoint of the unit Ncube (the point at the center). The radii are drawn to scale. The thickness of
the inner sphere reflects the standard deviation for the random point
distribution. This thickness is drawn to scale for N=35. The thickness goes to
zero quickly as N grows. The thickness of the outer sphere is actually zero,
but shown non-zero here for visibility.
22 Correlithm Object Technology
Figure II-4 shows the midpoint point of the N-cube surrounded also
by two spheres, an inner sphere, which represents the volume of the
N-cube sampled by random points and the outer sphere, which
represents the corners.
The inner sphere again represents the volume of the unit N-cube
sampled by random points, and the outer sphere represents all
corners. The radius of the inner sphere represents the expected
distance from the midpoint to the random points. The thickness of
that sphere represents the bounds of one standard deviation of the
expected distance. The radius of the outer sphere represents the
distance from the midpoint to any corner, which is geometrically
exact and thus has a standard deviation of zero, but in order to make
this sphere visible in the illustration, we have shown the outer
sphere with a small, non-zero thickness. This perspective is
significant because placing the origin of the unit N-cube at the
midpoint of the cube facilitates the use of the random points as
orthogonal basis vectors. This is because essentially any pair of
random points and the midpoint forms a triangle with a right angle
at the midpoint.
Although the specifics will differ, these same kinds of statistical
properties exist for any bounded N-space. Distances are all finite in
bounded spaces, even if the bounds are not provided by an N-cube
with unit edges. As long as there is no infinite length in any
direction in an N-dimensional object, in other words as long as the
N-dimensional object is finitely bounded, then similar finite
statistics exist. For example, we have found important uses for Ncubes of edge length two and for N-spheres of unit radius.
Similar statistical properties exist not only for real bounded Nspaces, but also for bounded N-spaces of any type of number. Pentti
Kanerva used binary N-cubes in his work (see Footnote 3). We use
real unit N-cubes for the computational model described in this
book. We have employed complex unitary N-spheres in our work in
quantum information science (QIS). Additional useful forms
undoubtedly exist.
Chapter II Unit N-Cubes 23
Moreover, there is a geometrical form that is closely related to the
cube that offers still more interesting aspects, namely the torus. An
N-torus is simply an N-cube whose dimensions have each been
“looped.” That is, each dimensional position is computed modulo
the extent of the dimension. For example, the value 0.99 in a
particular dimension of a unit N-torus is an absolute distance of 0.02
away from the value 0.01 in the same dimension, rather than an
absolute distance of 0.98.
For what follows in this book, it is very important to understand that
our intuition about squares (unit 2-cubes) and cubes (unit 3-cubes)
does not serve us very well for unit N-cubes. Volume grows very
rapidly as dimensions increase, and we have seen that remarkable
and unexpected statistics emerge. These notions are central to
correlithm object technology.
Correlithm Object Technology
25
Chapter III Probability and
Information
As long as the cube is larger than about 20
dimensions (50 to 100 dimensions is preferable for
creating a correlithm object system), a huge number
of randomly chosen points can be “packed” into a
unit N-cube, and they will all be nearly the same
distance apart from one another. As paradoxical as it
may seem, this property is statistically extremely
reliable. The points retain this nearly uniform
distance as long as the N-cube has enough
dimensions, and there will always be plenty of points
available to design a correlithm object system.
Because the random points are so reliably the same
distance apart, any points that are not about the
same distance apart are probably not created by a
random process. Abnormally close points carry
significant data that can be exploited to determine
which process probably created the points. This
information can then be used to build powerful error
correction, pattern recognition, and pattern
generation systems.
Probability and information are closely related. Our objective in this
chapter is to explore further the geometric probabilities of unit Ncubes that were introduced in the previous chapter, to relate those
probabilities to information theoretic concepts and to lay the
foundation for the computational paradigm that we will explore in
subsequent chapters. We will need the ability to calculate various
properties. First, we summarize the results, and then we explore
their derivations.
26 Correlithm Object Technology
Summary
Here is a summary and short discussion of the important
relationships that are developed in this chapter. Those who are not
interested in the mathematical details can read just this summary and
omit the rest of the chapter.
Relationship
Property: Distribution of Point-to-Point Distances
( 2 )
( )
2
2
2
1 ( ) σ
µ
σ π
d
normal d e
− −
= Equation
III-A
Property: Probability of Proximity
2 2 24.7( ) 7.45( ) ( ( 1, 2) ) 2 10 d d prob dist p p d − − − − < ≅ = µ µ Equation
III-J
Property: Bit Content of Proximity
2 ( ) 6 BitContent(d) ≅ µ − d
σ
Approximation for d ≅ 0 : B0σ ≅ N
Rule of Thumb: 4.122 bits per dimension
Equation
III-I
Property: Point Capacity
2 3.7( ) 10 d c − ≅ µ Equation
III-Q
Table III-1 Important probability and information relationships, where N is
the number of dimensions, µ ≅ N 6 and σ ≅ 7 120 ≅ 0.2415 .
The distance d between two randomly selected pair of points in a
real unit N-cube follows a normal distribution, as shown in the first
row of Table III-1. Here µ represents the standard distance, N 6 ,
and σ is the standard deviation of that expected distance, or about
7 120 . The fact of normal distribution allows us to derive several
approximations for the probability of proximity, which is the
probability that two randomly selected points, p1 and p2, will lie
closer together than distance d. This in turn leads to expressions for
Chapter III Probability and Information 27
the information content or bit content of proximity and the point
capacity of a unit N-cube, which is the number of points that we can
select at random and still be essentially certain that no two of them
will be closer together than distance d.
Here is the significance of these relationships. For a given real unit
N-cube, one can select a truly huge number of points at random with
near certainty that all pairs of them will lie very nearly the same
distance apart. The proximity of points that are not about the same
distance apart carries significant amounts of information. These
facts make available an enormous number of random points that can
be used to represent information, and points that are found to be
close to known points are almost certainly not random. These ideas
lie at the heart of the correlithm object computing paradigm that will
be developed in the rest of this book.
Distribution of Distances
The distances between pairs of points in a unit N-cube are normally
distributed. The distribution is shown in Equation III-A,
Equation III-A
(2 )
( )
2
2
2
1 ( ) σ
µ
σ π
d
normal d e
− −
=
where d is the distance between two points, 0 , .0 ≤ d ≤ N µ is the
mean or expected distance between two points, approximately equal
to N 6 , and σ is the standard deviation of that expected distance,
approximately equal to 7 120 . Figure III-1 provides some
examples for various values of N.
28 Correlithm Object Technology
N=20
N=50 N=100 N=200 N=500 N=1000
Figure III-1 Here are example probability distributions of distances between
randomly selected points in unit N-cubes, for various values of N, the number
of dimensions. The distributions are Gaussian. Their means grow with the
square root of N. Their standard deviations are constant.
Probability of Proximity
The probability that two points selected at random within the unit Ncube lie no further than distance d apart, termed the probability of
proximity, is given by Equation III-B
Equation III-B
∫ ∫ −∞ −∞
< = −
0
prob(dist( p1, p2) d) normal(d) normal(d)
d
where dist(p1,p2) is the distance between points p1 and p2 in the
unit N-cube. (See Figure III-2.)
Chapter III Probability and Information 29
0 d
Normal
Distribution
Prob
StdDist
Figure III-2 The probability that two random points in a unit N-cube lie no
further than d apart is the area under the normal curve between zero
distance and distance d. The normal curve peaks at standard distance
(StdDist).
The integral of a normal distribution does not have a closed analytic
form, but we can write it using the “complementary error function”
or erfc, shown in Equation III-C. This equation is valid for x < 0.
Equation III-C
( ) 2
1 normal(x) erfc x
x
= ∫
−∞
The variable, x, in Equation III-C must be in units of standard
deviation, so we let x = (µ − d)/σ because we also want x in terms
of a distance d that is bounded by zero and the mean.
30 Correlithm Object Technology
Substituting Equation III-C into Equation III-B, we obtain Equation
III-D.
Equation III-D
( ) 2
1 ( ) ( ) 2
1 ( ( 1, 2) )
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ d erfc erfc d prob dist p p d erfc − ≅

 

 − − < =
Unless d is very close to zero, the right-hand or “minus” erfc term is
negligible, and we can take it to be zero.
Various approximations to erfc exist. We are particularly interested
in the region where x is more than two or three standard deviations
from the mean. In this region we can use the approximation of
Equation III-E.
Equation III-E
π ( ) ( ) x π
e
x x x x
e erfc x
x x 2 2
3 2 2 2 2
2
1 3 5
2
1 3
2
1 ( ) 1
− −
≅








+ ⋅ ⋅ + ⋅ ≅ − + L
The right-hand term in the middle expression in equation Equation
III-E is uniformly less than one and rapidly approaches one as x
goes to minus infinity. So we set the right-hand term of the middle
expression to 1 to produce the final form for the approximation to
the complementary error function.
Substituting Equation III-E into Equation III-D, we obtain a good
approximation to the probability of proximity in Equation III-F.
Equation III-F
σ
µ
σ π
µ d
x
x
d e prob dist p p d erfc
x − ≅ = − < ≅
−
, 2
( ) 2
1 ( ( 1, 2) )
2
Chapter III Probability and Information 31
Information Content of Proximity
Information content in bits, often called “bit content,” of an event
with probability prob(x) is defined as –log2(prob(x)). The
probability of proximity from the previous section often involves
numbers very close to zero. It is often more convenient to express
this probability in terms of bit content.
To get the bit content of the probability that the distance between
two points is less than some distance d, we take minus the base two
logarithm of Equation III-F to get Equation III-G.
Equation III-G
σ
µ
π
d
x
x
e BitContent d
x − = 






 = −
−
( ) log ,
2
2
Equation III-G is of the form –log2(A/B), or –log2(A) +log2(B). For
x values in the range of interest, the log2(B) term is negligible with
respect to the log2(A) term. Noting that σ is essentially a constant,
we can write Equation III-H. The rightmost form often turns out to
be the most useful.
Equation III-H
2 2
2
2 ( ) 6 24.7( ) ln 2
1 ( ) log ( )
2
d d d BitContent d e x  ≅ − ≅ − 
 

 − ≅ − = − µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
This equation is valid so long as d is not extremely close to zero,
true if x is not within about one-tenth of one percent of the value of
µ/σ. If it is, then we have to use Equation III-D because bit content
really does go to infinity as d goes to zero. In spite of this fact, it is
often useful to estimate the “maximum bits per cell” by letting d go
to zero. Since µ is N 6 , BitContent(d=0) or B0 is about 4.122*N
or a little better than 4 bits per dimension. Equation III-I shows how
this result is obtained. This expression is often useful as a “rule of
thumb” that each of the N dimensions can carry a little more than
32 Correlithm Object Technology
four bits. We will probably never see a distance of zero in practice
due to noise and other factors, and Equation III-I is a “close enough”
representation of the bit content of exact match for many purposes.
Equation III-I
σ σ
µ
σ
N N BitContent d ≅ − d ≅ − = 2 2 0) 6 ( 6 ( ) 6 ( )
Approximation for d ≅ 0 : B0σ ≅ N
These bit content approximations will be highly useful later. But
there are also useful forms for the probability of proximity implied,
namely these.
Equation III-J
2 2 24.7( ) 7.45( ) ( ( 1, 2) ) 2 10 d d prob dist p p d − − − − < ≅ = µ µ
Point Capacity
Suppose we begin picking and tabulating random points in a real
unit N-cube. Let c be the number of points picked so far. As this
process proceeds, let us compute the distance between all of the c(c1)/2 pairs of points and keep track of the minimum distance, dm.
How many points do we have to pick before the probability that dm
becomes less than some particular distance d0 exceeds a given value,
such as 0.5? In other words, on average how big will c become
before it is, say, fifty-fifty or better for finding a pair that is less than
d0 apart?
The value of c for probability p is a measure of the point capacity of
the unit N-cube. We will shortly make extensive use of the
assumption that we can draw a large number of random points from
a given unit N-cube and expect them all to be at least d0 apart.
Accordingly, we need to be confident that given N, c and p, the
point capacity is ample.
Chapter III Probability and Information 33
The formulas for the probability of proximity developed above (in
Equation III-F and Equation III-J) tell us the probability that two
randomly chosen points are closer than distance d0. The probability
that they are further apart than distance d0 is one minus that
probability. At step c we choose a new point. We must then make c1 distance comparisons to previous points. Thus, the total number of
distance comparisons through step c is c(c-1). The probability that
all of those comparisons produce a distance greater than d0, that is,
the ) prob({all d} > d0 , is given in Equation III-K.
Equation III-K
( ) ( 1) / 2
0 0 ({ } d ) 1 ( ) − > = − ≤ c c prob all d prob d d
This equation is of the form shown in Equation III-L.
Equation III-L
k
p = (1− a)
Here 0 ≤ p ≤ 1, a is very close to 0 (see Equation III-J) and k is a
positive integer. The right-hand side is a well-studied polynomial of
the form shown in Equation III-M.
Equation III-M
( ) −L − = − + − = ∑ − =
− 2
0 2
( 1) 1 1
!( )!
! 1 a
k k
a ka
i k i
k
p
k
i
i k i i
Since a is very small, the term containing a2
 and all terms with
higher powers of a can be ignored. We can then readily solve for k.
Equation III-N
a
p p ka k − = − ⇒ = 1 1
34 Correlithm Object Technology
Now a is the probability that the distance, d, between two randomly
selected points is less than d0, which we know from Equation III-J.
Inserting that approximation, we get Equation III-O.
Equation III-O
2 7.45( ) (1 )10 1 d
p
a
p k − = − − = µ
Back in Equation III-L we set variable k to c(c-1)/2 the exponent in
Equation III-K. It is now clear from Equation III-O that any value of
d from zero to a significant fraction of µ will result in very large
values of k. When k is large, we can approximate c(c-1)/2 simply by
c
2
. Recalling that c is the number of random points selected, we can
make the following important conclusion.
Equation III-P
( ) 2
2
2 3.7( )
7.45( )
2
1
(1 )10 1 10 d
d
c k p p −
−
≅ ≅ − = − µ
µ
Equation III-P states that the number of points, c, that can be defined
in a unit N-cube before the probability exceeds p that two points
will be closer together than distance d is truly huge! Take the time to
let this sink in! It is a crucial point to understand.
For example, let N=96 so that µ ≅ 96 / 6 = 4 . Let d be 1.0. Let p
be 0.01, which means that if we repeat the casting of
3.7*9 33
c = 0.99*10 ≅ 1.9*10 points—a million, billion, billion,
billion points—100 times, we can expect that in 99 of those 100
repetitions, we will fail to produce one pair of points that are closer
together than 1.0!
Chapter III Probability and Information 35
For most purposes we want p as small as possible, so we might as
well take p to be zero, giving us the final form of the estimate of the
number of points we can select in a unit N-cube, given d, Equation
III-Q.
Equation III-Q
2
) 6
3.7(
10
d N
c −
≅
Equation III-P and Equation III-Q are telling us that as long as we
keep N “big enough,” a near proximity of two random points is very
unlikely to happen by chance. How big is “big enough”? Figure III3 can help to answer this question.
3σ
6σ
9σ
Figure III-3 Here are some examples of probable maximum point capacities.
The horizontal axis shows N, the number of dimensions of the N-cube. The
vertical axis is in the base-10 logarithm of the number of points. The curves
show what capacities we can expect with at least the indicated number of
standard deviations of separation between points. This chart illustrates why
there is a rule of thumb never to use fewer than 20 or so dimensions and to
prefer at least 50 or 100.
36 Correlithm Object Technology
As a “rule of thumb,” we should never pick an N of less than about
20 or so. At N=20, standard distance, N 6 , is only about 1.83, or
about 7.56 in units of standard deviation. All points will lie within
that distance of each other. If we want to ensure that we use only
points that are at least 6.0 standard deviations apart (a number that is
considered to be the “gold standard” for quality), then we need d to
be (7.56 – 6.0) * 0.2415 or about 0.38, which produces a c value of
about 60 million. That may seem to be a large number of available
points, but that leaves only about 1.56 standard deviations of
“headroom” for variations in known data points. Normally we
would prefer a lot more. Small values of N can be used (carefully)
for some purposes, but in that region, it is easy to confuse randomly
occurring close proximity with significant close proximity.
Equation III-P and Equation III-Q also show that only slightly larger
values of N, such as N=50 or N=100, make such confusion unlikely.
An N of 50 or 100 will suffice for many purposes, and values of N
significantly larger than that will have truly huge point capacities.
Figure III-3 shows this graphically.
Correlithm Object Technology
37
Chapter IV Elements of
Correlithm Object Computing
The correlithm object (CO) system has amazing
powers to flex. That flexibility enables the system to
do things that other systems, which rely on
exactitude, cannot. A traditional computer can be
compared to a standard automobile, which runs fine
if it stays on the roads, but off-road, it is nearly
worthless. A CO system is more like an SUV, which
works very well both on the road and off-road.
Traditional machines are precise. CO systems can
also be precise, but they are most at home with
ambiguity.
The type of processing found in a CO system offers a
broader spectrum of problem-solving capabilities in
situations where behavior must be adapted to existing
conditions and where similarity must be judged. A
CO system uses processes that are remarkably
similar in nature to the human analytical capabilities
of deduction and induction. To understand CO
systems, one must first understand key elements of
these systems.
In this chapter, we introduce the key elements of the Correlithm
Object (CO) computing paradigm, a new approach to computation
built on the concepts of the previous chapters.
The CO computing paradigm offers new and significant capabilities.
We will explore these in some detail in later chapters, but first we
must establish a common vocabulary and introduce some needed
notation.
38 Correlithm Object Technology
There are two ways to think about CO computing, because there are
two ways to think about a point in space. (See Figure IV-1.) In one
sense, a point is a single object, a “thing” that can be treated as one
monolithic entity. But a point can also be viewed as a set of
coordinates—a list of numbers—relative to a particular coordinate
system. Both of these perspectives are important, but they
emphasize different things, and sometimes one of them may be more
appropriate than the other.
X
Y
Z
Point

Figure IV-1 The same point viewed in object form and in coordinate form.
We will employ both of these perspectives at various times. The
“point” perspective turns out to be more of a “software” perspective.
It focuses attention on what a CO computing system is
accomplishing. In a sense, the “point” perspective is at a higher level
of abstraction than the “coordinate” perspective, which is more of a
“hardware” perspective that tends to focus attention on how a CO
computing system in fact accomplishes what it does.
The CO computing paradigm represents data using highdimensional points that are typically selected at random in a
bounded N-space and manipulates data by following known
pathways that connect these points. A critical characteristic of the
CO paradigm is its recognition that the probability or information
content of data is as important as the data itself. The CO
computing paradigm represents probability or information content
by proximity to known points.
Point = (X, Y, Z) =
(0.5, 0.4, 0.6)
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 39
Spaces
In its most general form, the CO computing paradigm is defined
within a bounded N-space, which is simply a space of N dimensions
where every possible straight line is of finite length. Here we will
limit our attention to the particular bounded N-space called the real
unit N-cube, an N-dimensional cube with an edge length of one.
(See Figure IV-2.)
Origin Unit Length
Random Point
Figure IV-2 Here is one way to try to visualize the N-dimensional unit cube.
The origin is at the lower left corner. The light gray lines radiating from the
corner suggest the N dimensions that meet at each corner. Two adjacent
corners are shown with unit length between them. The corner shown at the
top of the figure is the opposite corner to the origin, and the gray perimeter
lines and cloudy background suggest the high-dimensional cubic shape. A
randomly selected interior point is also shown.
For present purposes, we require that all coordinates of all points are
members of the set of real numbers between 0 and 1 inclusive, and
we place the origin at one corner of the N-cube. Other choices for
the type and range of numbers used to define the bounded N-space
40 Correlithm Object Technology
and for the location of the origin are also important in some forms of
CO computing. One important choice is to place the origin at the
midpoint of the N-cube. Other important choices are to employ
integers, complex numbers, or even more exotic number types. We
will not pursue such alternative choices here.
We focus on the CO computing paradigm in a real unit N-cube.
There are N dimensions available. We often use “dimension” and
cell interchangeably. A particular position within a dimension is
called a coordinate. Its value must be a real number no less than
zero and no greater than one.

A space is any set of dimensions and a subspace is any subset of a
space. Similarly, a ply is any set of cells and a subply is any subset
of cells. The full space is the set of all available dimensions, and the
full ply is the set of all available cells. Often it is clear from context
that a particular set of dimensions or cells is a subset of another set
of dimensions or cells, and we omit the “sub” prefix.
We give names to spaces as we define them. These names may be
anything, but often follow the common programming rules for
identifiers.
We select a space by choosing a specified number of dimensions
from the full space. For simplicity, all of the spaces we choose here
will be disjoint, meaning they have no dimensions in common,
unless otherwise stated.
Normally, we select a space by choosing a specified number of
dimensions at random from the full space. This method can of
course result in overlap (dimensions in common) between two or
more spaces. Although it may appear otherwise, overlap is usually
not a problem. In fact, we will see later that overlap can be a useful
property. When working with the CO computing paradigm, one
should normally resist the urge to use non-random methods, because
many of this paradigm’s primary properties emerge from stochastic
processes. One should only use deterministic methods when it is
very clear why stochastic methods are wrong for a particular case.
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 41
We will sometimes need to establish set-theoretic relationships
among various plies. We can define a ply as the intersection or
union of (the dimensions of) two other plies. For example, we might
define ply r as the intersection of plies p and q, or we might define r
as the union of plies p and q. The complement or logical NOT of a
ply is all defined dimensions that are not found in the ply. For
example, given plies p and q, we can define ply r as the
“complement of q with respect to p,” or as the “remainder of p
minus q,” or simply as “p and not q.” Thus r would be all of the
dimensions of p that are not in q.
Points
The most fundamental operation in the CO computing paradigm is
the definition of a point. We often use “point” and CO (Correlithm
Object) interchangeably. To define a point, we specify (1) the
particular space that will contain the point and (2) the coordinates of
the point within that space. Just as a space can be selected randomly
or deterministically, so can the coordinates of a point. We usually
select coordinates randomly, but note that there are important
exceptions to this that will come up later.
We give names to points as we select them. As with spaces, these
names may be anything, but often follow the common programming
rules for identifiers. Since we can define many points within a given
space, it is convenient to use a notation that gives both the name of
the space and the name of the point within that space.
For example, see Figure IV-3. Suppose we have two spaces (plies)4
named p and q. Let us identify two points in p named c and d and
one point in q named c, and refer to these three points as p.c, p.d,
and q.c respectively. Point q.c is a different point than point p.c
because they are in different spaces. The identification of a

4 This is an example of a case where it is clear from context that we mean
subspaces or subplies, and the “sub” prefix is omitted.
42 Correlithm Object Technology
particular point requires both the name of the space and the name of
the point within that space.
Full Ply
Ply p
p.c Ply q
p.d
q.c
Figure IV-3 Here is a full ply with two of its subplies, p and q, identified.
Three points are shown, p.c and p.d in ply p and q.c in ply q.
Soft Tokens
Points in spaces (COs in plies) are used to represent all data in the
CO computing paradigm. Associating a CO with data is a very
fundamental notion. It is the sole means available for representing
data. Far from being limiting, this one-data-type idea turns out to
support a wealth of new computing capabilities. It may help to think
of a CO as analogous to a storage location in a traditional computer,
with the associated data as the contents of the location. This analogy
can be misleading, however, because the CO does not store the data.
It represents the data.
A CO that is representing data is sometimes called a soft token. As
we saw in Chapter III, it is very unlikely that two COs that are
selected at random in the same ply will be in close proximity to each
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 43
other. If two COs are in close proximity, they are almost certainly
not randomly selected. It is far more likely that some non-random
process produced both COs and that noise in that process accounts
for the small variations in position.
This principle that close proximity does not happen by accident may
become clearer with an analogy. Suppose we are in a shooting
gallery, and all we can see is the target. Suppose we know that there
are two shooters, one who is an amateur and one who is an expert. A
shot is fired, and in Figure IV-4, we see it hit very near the bullseye. Can we guess which shooter took the shot?
Figure IV-4 Who most likely fired the shot at this target, the amateur or the
expert?
Of course we cannot be absolutely certain, but doesn’t it seem much
more likely that the expert fired the shot rather than the amateur?
Similarly, suppose we are in a ply, p, and all we can see is the CO
p.c. Suppose we know that there are two processes, one that picks
COs at random in p and one that deterministically picks p.c but
suffers from a small amount of noise. One of these processes makes
44 Correlithm Object Technology
a pick, CO p.c’, which appears very near to the known point p.c.
(See Figure IV-5.) Can we guess which process made the pick?
Ply p
p.c
p.c’
Close together
Figure IV-5 Is it more likely that p.c’ came from a random process, or the
same noisy process that produced p.c?
Chapter III gave us the tools to be quantitative about this. Let the
number of dimensions in p be 100. Suppose the distance between
p.c and p.c’ is 0.5. This means that the expected distance µ between
two randomly selected points in p is about 100 6 or about 4.08.
Then the probability of a random proximity of 0.5 or less is given in
Equation IV-A.
Equation IV-A
7.45(4.08 0.5) 95.5 ( ( . , . ') 0.5) 10 10 2 − − − prob dist p c p c < ≅ ≅
So the probability that the CO p.c’ came from the random process is
not zero, but it is very, very close to zero. If we assume that the
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 45
slightly noisy, deterministic process made the pick, we will not be
wrong very often.
There is, of course, another possibility in both examples. The shot or
the CO p.c’ could have come from some third, unknown source.
That possibility cannot be ruled out. But in the absence of any
additional information, we have no reason to assume a third source.
Said another way, given that there are exactly two possible sources,
what are the probabilities that each was the source of this shot? We
use this Bayesian-like approach to probability extensively in the CO
computing paradigm.
These examples suggest that random COs will essentially never
appear in the near vicinity of a particular CO p.c. A CO p.c’ that
does appear nearby is probably a “noisy version of p.c.” Most likely,
the same process produced both COs, and their separation is simply
due to noise. If p.c represents a particular item of data, then p.c’
probably does as well. That probability is determined by the
distance between the two points.
Thus, a particular CO p.c has a kind of “zone of influence” around it
(See Figure IV-6), in the sense that any CO that is found to be in the
near vicinity of p.c probably represents the same data as p.c, and we
can quantify that probability. The existence of this “CO field”
surrounding each CO is the reason we call a CO a “soft token.” A
CO represents particular data not just exactly at its exact coordinates
but also to decreasing degree at nearby coordinates. A CO
establishes a region in its ply whose boundaries “fade away” much
like gravity fades away from a star. A CO is a token that represents
information, but a token with no identifiable “edges.” In place of
edges is a gradient of information relevance that falls quadratically
with distance (see Equation III-I).
Known points in a space are called pattern COs. These landmarklike positions are the centers of known soft tokens. We will shortly
see that in a ply in the CO computing paradigm there is a single,
time-varying point defined by the instantaneous values of the cells
46 Correlithm Object Technology
comprising the ply. Such a point is a state CO, and over time, the
state CO can travel to any location in the ply.
Figure IV-6 Here is the “zone of influence” around a CO. We show the Nspace as a 2D mottled plain. The small sphere at the center of the cone
represents a CO. The light-colored rod at the right represents standard
distance, with the dark rods spaced one standard deviation apart. We see the
cone grow quadratically (measured in bits of information) as we approach
the CO. The closer we get to the CO, the more bits that proximity is “worth.”
The notion of a “soft token” is a powerful concept. No longer must
data representations necessarily be exact, sharp-edged, brittle, black
or white, zero or one. Instead, pattern COs co-opt the regions
surrounding them to represent data. These regions define something
like an “information field” that varies inversely with the square of
distance, very much like a gravitational field. All data represented
by a soft token acquires an inherent probabilistic nature. CO data
representations are both approximate and robust, both unambiguous
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 47
and in shades of gray. They are inherently soft and resilient instead
of hard and sharp-edged.5
Using “soft tokens” to represent data fundamentally changes the
model of computation from one that is brittle, exact, and unforgiving
to one that has flexibility, accommodation, and a forgiving nature. A
CO represents a data object, and the “field” around it defines its
“territory.” Any CO found in its territory is quantifiably likely to
stand for the same data object. The “softness” in soft tokens adds
generality: soft tokens can represent exact data if needed, but the
“information field” is always present around them to represent not
just the data, but also our confidence in that data.
Rules
A rule is a directed line segment from a set of soft tokens called the
source to a set of soft tokens called the target. Rules perform all
data manipulation in the CO computing paradigm.
Suppose we have two COs, s.c and t.d. (See Figure IV-7.)
Following the notation established above, s.c is understood to
represent CO c in ply s and similarly, t.d represents CO d in ply t.
We require only that s and t both have enough dimensions (for CO
stability), and we select c and d at random within s and t
respectively.
Now we can introduce rule notation. Consider the statement in Rule
IV-1.
Rule IV-1
s.c >: t.d

5
 The soft tokens of the CO computing paradigm and the “Fuzzy Logic” of Zadeh
have similarities. [Zadeh, L.A., "Fuzzy sets," Information and Control, Vol. 8, pp.
338-353, 1965, and subsequent literature.] Soft tokens can be used to implement
Fuzzy Logic. But soft tokens form the basis for the CO computing paradigm,
which is a complete computational model with significant new capabilities.
48 Correlithm Object Technology
Space s
Space t
s.c
Rule t.d
Figure IV-7 Here is a rule that associates point s.c in a source space to point
t.d in a target space.
The operator “>:” is the rule operator. It separates the terms s.c and
t.d in the rule. Whatever terms are found on the angle bracket side
of the operator are collectively called the source of the rule, and
whatever terms are on the colon side of the operator are collectively
called the rule’s target.
The statement in Rule IV-2 is entirely equivalent to the one in Rule
IV-1.
Rule IV-2
t.d :< s.c
Some people prefer their rules to read from left-to-right as in Rule
IV-1, and some prefer right-to-left as in Rule IV-2. This stems from
the origin of this notation, which is rooted in the productions of
formal grammars. We will use the left-to-right form Rule IV-1 here.
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 49
Rule IV-1 instructs us to watch the region around s.c. If a point s.c’
appears near s.c, we must generate a new point t.d’ near t.d. (See
Figure IV-8.) How this is done is called rule execution, and we will
discuss that subject later on.
Mapping
Rule
t.d’
t.d
s.c’
s.c
Figure IV-8 The rule that maps point s.c to point t.d causes s.c’ near s.c to
map to t.d’ near t.d.
It is common to call t.d the name of s.c. More generally, the target
of a rule is the name of the source of the rule.
Strings
We can define a set of COs in a ply by using one or more subscripts,
as in p.ci, i=1..k or p.di,j, i=1..k, j=1.m. A set of COs with subscripts
is called a string CO or simply a string.
Subscripts establish an ordering or geometric relationship among the
COs. If there is only one subscript, then the ordering is onedimensional, and the name string seems reasonable. If there are two
50 Correlithm Object Technology
subscripts, the relationship is two-dimensional, and so forth, and the
name string does not seem to apply as well. Nevertheless, COs with
any number of subscripts are still called strings.
Consider the one-dimensional string CO defined above, namely p.ci,
i=1..k. Suppose we build these COs such that the distance between
p.ci and p.ci+1 is less than standard distance, and we do it in a way
that does not affect the standard distance between each of them and
any other random CO in p such as p.q. Then we have reflected the
ordering supplied by the subscript, i, in the adjacency of the
corresponding COs. In other words, two COs that are close together
by subscript are also close together by distance. (See Figure IV-9).
p.ci p.ci+1
p.ci-1
Distance
Figure IV-9 Distance from p.ci to other members of the string CO, showing
how distance in N-space increases to standard distance as distance in string
CO sequence grows.
In general, string COs are used to embed lower dimensional sampled
geometries into the higher-dimensional subspaces used in the CO
computing paradigm. The adjacency found in the samples is
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 51
reflected in the COs. A common use of the 1-dimensional string CO
is to capture the time axis in a series of time samples. A common
use of the 2-dimensional string CO is to capture proximity of objects
in an image.
It is common to set up rules such as Rule IV-3.
Rule IV-3
p.ci >: q.d, i=1..k
This rule is really a set of k rules that map every CO ci in p to the
single CO d in q. (See Figure IV-10.)
p.ci
q.di
Figure IV-10 Here we associate the CO elements of a string CO in space p
with an equivalent number of CO elements in space q.
In this way, the single point q.d is mapped from all of the ci in p. In
effect, this lets the single CO, q.d, stand for the entire string CO by
making it stand for any of the members of the string. Thus, not only
52 Correlithm Object Technology
can we name a single CO with a CO as in Rule IV-1, we can also
name a string with a CO as in Rule IV-3. Yet another use is shown
in Figure IV-10.
We normally expect the COs that are adjacent by subscript in a
string CO to be closer together than standard distance, but it is still a
string CO if subscript-adjacent COs are at standard distance, or even
farther apart than standard distance.
Sensors and Actors
A system built on the CO computing paradigm represents all
internal data using COs and performs all data manipulation using
rules. There are, of course, many kinds of data besides COs. To get
data into and out of a CO system, we must convert between world
data and COs. Not surprisingly, this is done using converters.
There are two kinds of converters, sensors and actors. A sensor is
built of special rules that have world data sources and CO targets.
An actor is the opposite. It is built of special rules that have CO
sources and world data targets.
Converters come in a variety of types. There are cardinal, ordinal,
and continuous converters that handle world data with each of those
characteristics. There are quantized converters (and rules!) that
“error-correct” their world data to specific values and interpolating
converters that deal with both world and CO values in between
known values.
The subject of converters is an extensive one. Our object in
mentioning converters here is simply to let the reader know that they
exist, that means, in fact, exist in the CO computing paradigm to get
data into a system and to get it out again. We will revisit converters
a little later, but a thorough study of converters is a subject all to
itself.
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 53
Systems
A system in the CO computing paradigm, typically called a CO
system, is a set of rules. These typically include both converter rules
and the internal rules that map COs to COs.
Programming a CO system involves defining the rules and the
elements that compose them. In many cases, the details of the
elements can be defaulted, since in many cases the only
requirements are that the elements be “large enough” and have the
required amount and type of stochastic behavior. Building CO
systems that deviate from these defaults is another advanced topic.
Rules are chained together to build programs. Consider example
Rule IV-4.
Rule IV-4
p.c >: q.d
q.d >: r.e
If the first rule fires (meets the conditions necessary for its
execution), then a point near d in space q comes into existence. That
causes the second rule to fire, bringing a point near e in space r into
existence. This trivial example suggests how rule chains are formed.
Rule sets can be much more complex, of course, than what we have
seen thus far. It is common for a rule to have two or more terms in
the source and in the target, as in Rule IV-5, and feedback loops are
frequently employed, as in Rule IV-6.
Rule IV-5
p1.a p2.b p3.c >: q1.d q2.e q3.f
Rule IV-6
p1.a p2.bi >: p2.bi+1, i=1..k
54 Correlithm Object Technology
Miscellaneous
As CO systems become more complex, it is frequently convenient to
build re-usable subsystems generically called parts. A part is a set of
rules defined as a single object. A part can be instantiated repeatedly
and “wired into” the rest of a CO system. A part can itself contain
parts, or in other words, a part can be “hierarchically composed.”
The notation for a part is simply a wrapper around a set of rules.
Here is the general syntax:
 <part_name> { (one or more rules or parts) }
 <instantiation_name> = <part_name>
The <part_name> is the name of the object class. The first example
above shows the generic definition of a part. The second shows
instantiation of the part. The <instantiation_name> can subsequently
be used as a prefix to access terms of rules inside the part from
outside the part.
Here are some examples:
 part1 {s1.p1 >: s2.p2 }
 part2 { s1.p1 >: s3.p3 }
 part3 {
 pt1 = part1
 pt2 = part2
 s1.p1 >: pt1.s1.p1
 pt2.s3.p3 >: s2.p2
 }
The first two examples above each define parts with one rule. The
third, part3, starts by defining pt1 and pt2 as instantiations of part1
and part2, respectively. Point s1.p1 in the third line is a point in a
space s1 that are both uniquely instantiated in any instantiation of
part3. Point pt1.s1.p1 references the unique s1.p1 in pt1, an
instantiation of part1. Similarly, pt2.s3.p3 references the unique
s3.p3 in pt2, an instantiation of part2. Finally, s2.p2 is a point in a
Chapter IV Elements of Correlithm Object Computing 55
space, s2, that are both uniquely instantiated in any instantiation of
part2.
A lobe is usually—but not always—a part with no converter rules.
A Synthorg® is the term given to a complete CO system, especially
one that only accepts or produces world data; that is, a CO system
where all COs are internally hidden and only world data interfaces
are visible.
Correlithm Object Technology
57
Chapter V Correlithm Object
Machines
The level of the computing machine model presented
here is roughly analogous to the machine language
level of a traditional computer. The model is a formal
description of a CO computing system. It is useful
both from a theoretical perspective and as a basis for
engineering real CO systems.
We have built and tested implementations of this
model under actual use conditions with outstanding
results.
Here we present a model of the computing machine implied by the
correlithm object (CO) computing paradigm. This model is at a level
roughly analogous to the machine language level of a traditional
computer. (See Figure V-1.)
Space S: State Point P(t)
Subspace s1
Subspace s2
Pattern Point s1.p1
Pattern Point s2.p2
Distance d1
Distance d2
Mapping Caused by Rule
s1.p(t) >: s2.p(t+1)
State Point s2.p(t+1)
Rule: s1.p1 >: s2.p2
State Point s1.p(t)
Space S: State Point P(t)
Figure V-1 Basic CO machine operation. The rule s1.p1 >: s2.p2 maps
s1.p(t) to s2.p(t+1).
58 Correlithm Object Technology
A single, time-varying N-dimensional point P(t) carries the state of
the machine. This point can be specified as a time-varying set of N
coordinates that are defined in a real unit N-cube, the bounded space
S. Any subset of these coordinates is a subset of P(t) that can be
viewed as state point p(t) defined in subspace, s, of the N-cube, or
s.p(t).
Rules provide the action of the machine. A rule maps s1.p(t), the
current state point in subspace s1 (called the source subspace or
simply the source), to s2.p(t+1), a next state point in subspace s2
(called the target subspace or simply the target). It does this by
referring to two time-invariant points, p1 and p2 (called pattern
points), defined in s1 and s2, respectively, or s1.p1 and s2.p2, which
are maintained within the rule. In effect, a rule “watches” the
movement of the state point in its source and controls the movement
of the next state point in its target. The rule moves the controlled
point so that its next distance d2 to the target pattern point reflects
the current distance d1 between the watched source point and the
source pattern point. This movement will be discussed in more detail
shortly.
A cell is the usual name for the storage for a single dimension of the
N-cube. A cell holds one coordinate of the state point P(t) at time t.
We can think of a cell as a memory location in a traditional
computer that can store one real6
 number in the range of 0.0..1.0.
Each rule is a self-contained, independent object that operates on the
cells without regard to the operation of any other rule. The machine
we consider here is clocked, and during one clock cycle of the
machine, every rule is executed or “cycled” one time. During a
cycle, a rule examines its source subspace or set of cells, compares
the state point it finds there to its source pattern point, generates a

6 Real numbers are used in this particular CO computing machine. Almost
any type of number may be used if used consistently, including binary,
integer, rational, complex, and even more exotic forms such as qubits and
ebits from QIS (Quantum Information Science). Some types have unique
advantages.
Chapter V Correlithm Object Machines 59
target state point considering source proximity and its target pattern
point and writes the generated state point to the cells of its target
subspace.
A rule sets the next time step values of cells in its target from the
current time step values of cells in its source. This apparently
requires the existence of two cell arrays, a current cell array and a
next cell array, to prevent later-executing rules within one cycle
from possibly using results produced by earlier-executing rules
within the same cycle.
The correct overall behavior of a CO machine, however, is often
remarkably insensitive to the exact details of its operation. Two cell
arrays are not usually necessary, and incremental update methods
exist. All rules do not have to fire within a given cycle. Rules can
both read and write the same cells, and they can fire with little
regard to the time of firing of other rules, providing certain
conditions are met. But these are advanced topics that will not be
covered here. Instead, here we will assume that there are two cell
arrays, that rules read from the current array and write to the next
array, and that all cells execute exactly once in every machine cycle.
Shortly, we will consider what happens when two rules both try to
set the values of the same cells in the next array. Far from being a
problem, what results is actually a valuable strength of a CO
machine.
Definition of a Correlithm Object Machine
Here is a formal definition of a correlithm object machine.
Definition: A correlithm object machine is a tuple (c,r), where c is
a set of n cells, { } ci , i = 1..n , and r is a set of k rules, {rj , j = 1..k}.
(See Figure V-2.)
Each cell has a unique address, i, and a time-varying state, ci(t),
where 0 0.0 ≤ c (t) ≤ 1. i . A cell corresponds to one unique dimension
of a bounded N-space. Recall that we are using the unit N-cube here
as our bounded N-space. Other bounded N-spaces could be used.
60 Correlithm Object Technology
…
ci+8(t+1)
…
 ci(t+1)
ci+1(t+1)
ci+2(t+1)
ci+3(t+1)
ci+4(t+1)
ci+5(t+1)
ci+6(t+1)
ci+7(t+1)
rj: s1.p1 >: s2.p2
rj+1
rj-1
.
.
.
.
.
.
Current Array Next Array Rules
ci+8(t)
 ci(t)
ci+1(t)
ci+2(t)
ci+3(t)
ci+4(t)
ci+5(t)
ci+6(t)
ci+7(t)
…
…
Figure V-2 The Correlithm Object Machine. All rules are executed in
parallel at every time step. A rule reads a state point from a source subset of
cells (such as s1) at time t and writes a state point to a target subset of cells
(such as s2) at time t+1. A rule writes a randomly selected state point in the
target whose proximity to the target pattern point s2.p2 reflects the proximity
of the source state point to the source pattern point s1.p1.
A ply, p, is set a of M cell (or dimension) addresses,
{ } am , m = 1..M . The set of values in the particular cells referenced
by a at time t, { } ci( )t , , is called the i ∈a state CO for ply p at time t.
Pattern COs are time-invariant points.
Rules store pattern COs internally and relate those pattern COs to
state COs. The simplest rule syntax has the form shown here.
s1.p1 >: s2.p2
This rule can be read as follows. “If you see that the state point at
the current time (= t) in the ply s1, s1.p(t), is ‘near’ the ply s1
pattern point, s1.p1, then build a new state point, s2.p(t+1), for ply
s2 that is ‘similarly near’ the pattern point s2.p2 in ply s2.” To do
Chapter V Correlithm Object Machines 61
this, find the distance, d1, that s1 lies from s1.p1, then choose a new
state point, s2.p(t+1), based on pattern point s2.p2 and that distance.
Building a New State Point
There are a variety of ways to use s2.p2 and distance to choose the
new state point. We could choose s2.p(t+1) by randomly selecting a
point in s2 that lies at distance d1 from s2.p2. We could express d1
in units of standard deviation and use that in s2, which has the added
benefit that it maintains distance statistics in s2 even if s2 does not
have the same number of dimensions as s1. We could maintain f, the
fraction of standard distance in s1 represented by d1, by picking at
random a point in s2 with the same fraction of standard distance
from s2.p2. Many other methods are possible. How can we choose
which method to use? Let us review some basic principles of CO
systems to begin to narrow our choices.
Interpolation Form of Rule
The distance, d1, between s1.p(t) and s1.p1 in ply s1 of D1
dimensions is simply the square root of the sum of the squares of the
individual cell differences. (See Equation V-A.) Similarly, the
distance d2 between the desired point, s2.p(t+1), and s2.p2 in ply s2
of D2 dimensions is shown in Equation V-B.
Equation V-A
∑( ) =
= = −
1
1
2 1 ( 1. ( ), 1. 1) 1. ( ) 1. 1
D
i
i i d dist s p t s p s p t s p
62 Correlithm Object Technology
Equation V-B
∑( ) =
= + = + −
2
1
2 2 ( 2. ( 1), 2. 2) 2. ( 1) 2. 2
D
i
i i d dist s p t s p s p t s p
If the distance between s1.p(t) and s1.p1 is d1, suppose we simply
pick a point for s2.p(t+1) at random from the set of points in s2 that
are about d1 from s2.p2. We know that standard distance in s2 is
S2 6 , where S2 is the number of dimensions in s2. Let
f = d1/ S2 6 , where f is the fraction of standard distance
represented by d1 in s2. Suppose we generate a random point, s2.q,
in s2, then interpolate from s2.p2 to s2.q by fraction f. Just
interpolate each corresponding dimension. Since s2.p2 and s2.q will
automatically be at about standard distance (as a result of the
statistics of random points in real unit N-cubes), if we set
s2.pi( ) t +1 = s2.p2i + f ⋅(s2.qi − s2.p2i), i =1..S2
then s2.p(t+1) will be at about the right distance, d1, from s2.p2.
 7
This interpolation form of rule is simple, but it does not maintain
certain statistics, namely the probability that a point, p1, chosen at
random in the space will lie at a distance from the pattern point p2
no greater than the distance d. From Table III-1Table III-1 in
Chapter III, we have:
2 2 24.7( ) 7.45( ) ( ( 1, 2) ) 2 10 d d prob dist p p d − − − − < ≅ = µ µ
Recall that µ = N 6 is the standard distance, where N is the
number of dimensions in the space. The probability will be
maintained only if s1 and s2 have the same number of dimensions.

7 There are many ways to obtain a good point. This is not normally the best
way. It is presented here primarily because of its simplicity, which is useful
for illustration.
Chapter V Correlithm Object Machines 63
Cell Form of Rule
We can quite easily compute a distance d2 that maintains the same
probability in s2 that d1 produces in s1. We simply set the
probabilities in the two spaces equal to each other and solve for d2:
prob(dist _ in _ s2( p1, p2) < d2) = ) prob(dist _ in _ s1( p1, p2) < d1 2 7.45( 2 2) 10− µ −d
 = 10 , 1 1 6, 2 2 6 2 7.45( 1 1) S S d = = − − µ µ µ
d 2 = 1 d1+ µ2 − µ
A rule such as “s1.p1 >: s2.p2” compactly expresses a set of rules of
the form:
s1.p1 >: si.c, i=1..S2
where si represents each of the dimensions in s2 in turn. This form
of rule causes a single cell to be viewed as a function over time. The
cell “watches” the movement of the state point, s1.p(t), in a given
space such as s1 and produces a new state value for itself that is
close to the given target value, si.c, as the state point is close to the
source point, s1.p1. This “cell form” of rule highlights the fact that
the values taken on by a cell depend only on the values of the source
sides of the rules that affect the cell. A cell’s next state value clearly
must not depend on the values of other target cells that may have
similar source-side rules.
Target Cell Independence
Both of the methods require that each target cell knows the number
of dimensions in both s1 and s2. Knowing the number of dimensions
in s1 is fine. Two target cells may both be defined on the same
source cells and remain completely independent. But requiring
knowledge of the number of dimensions in s2 means that every
target cell in s2 depends on every other target cell in s2. If even one
of the target cells were to fail, the distances and statistics in s2
would change and so would the states of every remaining cell.
It is highly desirable for target cells to remain independent. One
reason is that CO systems are inherently parallel in several ways that
64 Correlithm Object Technology
can be exploited. Target cell independence is one of these
exploitable parallelisms, perhaps the most important one. This will
be revisited later in this book, when we discuss the Architecture of
CO systems. Another reason is that the CO computing paradigm is a
statistical computing paradigm. We want as much behavior as
possible to emerge from statistical processes. In particular, we
would like a given cell to participate as a target cell in many rules.
We would like to select target cells for rules statistically, not
algorithmically. If we do this, it will be unlikely for two target
cells—let alone a large number of target cells—to participate in
exactly the same set of rules. One of the strengths of the CO
computing paradigm is that this concept is not only workable, but
often highly desirable. We will return to the question of how to
compute target cell values shortly, but first we must explore the CO
computing paradigm more deeply.
Dimensions Appearing in Multiple Rules
Up to this point we have assumed that a rule has a single source
space and a single target space and that a particular cell appears in
exactly one place, either in the source space or in the target space.
Things are usually a bit more complicated. To investigate these
matters, we need first to look at some of the syntax of a rule.
Consider the following syntax definition:
We see that a Rule relates a Source to a Target with the directional
operator “>:”. The Source and Target are each built from a
TermList, which in turn is comprised of one or more Terms, and a
Term is defined as a Space followed by a period “.” Followed by a
PatternPoint.
<Rule> ::= <Source> >: <Target>
<Source> ::= <TermList>
<Target> ::= <TermList>
<TermList> ::= <Term> | <TermList> <Term>
<Term> ::= <Space> . <PatternPoint>
From a semantic perspective, a Space is a set of dimensions and a
PatternPoint is one time-invariant dimension value for each
Chapter V Correlithm Object Machines 65
dimension in the Space. A particular dimension will appear at most
once in a Space’s dimension set. But Space dimension sets are
usually selected independently and often statistically, and two
Spaces may have dimensions in common.
How then are rules computed when the same dimension can appear
in multiple Terms in the Source and the Target of any number of
Rules? This question is equivalent to asking how to compute the
value of a single target cell.
Here is the key to this problem. A rule does not set a value into a
target cell. It weights the target pattern value from the Rule for that
cell. After all rules have provided weights to all of their target cells,
each target cell independently computes its own new state value
from its own accumulated weights and its pattern value, then
reinitializes its weights.
A rule passes the same weight to each of its target cells. The weight
is often the reciprocal of the probability of distance that we used
above, from Table III-1 in Chapter III. Each cell computes a new
value as the first moment of the target values for the cell from each
of the rules, weighted by the corresponding weights. Here is the
formula for a target cell’s new state value:
weight i k k Rules d d
i 1/10 10 , 1.. , 2 2 7.45( ) 7.45( ) = = = − µ − µ −
∑
∑
=
= = k
i
i
k
i
i i
weight
weight pattern value
new cell value
1
1
* _
Notice that if there is only one rule contributing to the target cell’s
new value (i.e., k=1), then the new cell value is the pattern value
regardless of the weight. In a practical system, it may be desirable to
inject a “noise floor” at a pre-set weight, so that such “exact
matches” only occur when the rule’s weight is significantly greater
than the noise floor.
66 Correlithm Object Technology
This method allows each target cell to be independent. All a target
cell needs to obtain its new value is the target pattern values and the
weights from its various rules. It is simple, and it works well in
practice.
Consider a rule of this sort:
1.c.S1.p1 s2.p2 … >: s3.p3 s4.p4 …
The source in this rule contains multiple terms. To evaluate a source
with multiple terms and obtain a distance, use the following
formula.
( )( )
2
1
1
2
1
2 1. 1 ( ) 1. 1 2. 2 ( ) 2. 2 

 

 = ∑ − +∑ − + = =
L
C
i
i i
C
i
dist s p i t s p i s p t s p
The part inside the square root is a sum of independent squared
differences. Even if the same cell appears in more than one defined
subspace, for example both s1 and s2, the formula is unambiguous.
The fact that we may be using the same cell twice or more in the
distance formula is acceptable, since a given cell only appears once
in each subspace and different subspaces compare their state points
to different pattern points.
A cell that appears in source terms of different rules is likewise no
problem. Each cell will be evaluated within a rule by this formula,
and there will be no interaction in the evaluation of the source sides
of different rules.
The target in the rule contains multiple terms. The fact that a target
cell accumulates incremental contributions to its final value during a
cycle means that a cell appearing in more than one term does not
introduce ambiguities.
For similar reasons, there is no ambiguity with a cell appearing in
the target side of different rules. The cell accumulates incremental
Chapter V Correlithm Object Machines 67
contributions from all sources and incorporates all of the
contributions by the end of each cycle.
Some readers may be uncomfortable with the seemingly arbitrary
choices of these particular formulas. Indeed, other choices could be
made that would also work well. The CO computational paradigm is
predicated on averages and approximations, and we frequently
discover robust behavior in the presence of what would appear to be
intolerable levels of noise. It should therefore come as no surprise
that these forgiving characteristics extend even to the choices of
formulas, at least within certain bounds. We want the rules to
behave in particular ways. We especially want target cells to be able
to calculate their next value independent of the calculations of any
other target cell. These formula choices have the merit that they all
have a firm basis in statistics and information theory, but most
importantly, we have tested them under actual use of the computing
paradigm, with outstanding results. Perhaps it will be possible at
some point in the future to “prove” that these are the “right”
formulas, or to discover better formulas. Until then, we will continue
to take this “engineering approach.”
Correlithm Object Technology
69
Chapter VI Completeness
“Completeness” is an important theoretical concept.
The processes of computation can be compared to a
system of towns and roads. If we can only travel by
road, are there towns we cannot reach? If we can
only compute with a particular type of computer, are
there programs we cannot run? If we can show that a
particular computer has the “completeness”
property, then that computer can run any program.
Traditional computers and correlithm object
computers both have this crucial “completeness”
property. Both also have lesser “completeness”
properties, including the ability to compute any
logical proposition and the absence of something
called the “perceptron limitation.”
Traditional computers are based on the Von Neumann computing
paradigm. These “Von Neumann architecture” machines typically
feature a single processing unit and a random access memory, and
execute serially meaning only one thing happens at a time. A “CO
architecture” machine is highly parallel and redundant. Many things
happen at once on several levels. Von Neumann machines and CO
machines are good at very different things, as we will see in later
chapters. But both are general-purpose computers. This is wellknown for Von Neumann machines. Here we will establish this
important property for CO machines, together with several other
related properties that are grouped together under the general
heading of “completeness” in the Theory of Computation.
70 Correlithm Object Technology
Logical “NOT”
One of the simplest logical operations possible is the logical “NOT”.
We will start by showing how to code this function for a CO
machine.
The logical “NOT” function simply maps True to False and False to
True. We establish two spaces, s1 and s2, and place two points in
each, one to represent True and one to represent False. Then we
write rules to connect them. (See Figure VI-1.) Here is the code:
s1.True >: s2.False
s1.False >: s2.True
T
F
F
T
s1 s2
state
state
Figure VI-1 Visualization of a logical NOT function. The black points and
arrows illustrate the pattern points in both spaces and how they are mapped
by the rules. The white points and arrow show how a state point in s1 in the
vicinity of T would map to a state point in s2 near F.
Chapter 6 Completeness 71
At time, t, state point s1.state(t) exists in space s1. If we set
s1.state(t) to s1.True (by means that are not shown here), then the
distance between the state point in s1 and the pattern point s1.True
in the first rule will be zero, while the distance between the state
point in s1 and the pattern point s1.False in the second rule will be
standard distance for the space s1. As a result, the first rule’s target
point, s2.False, will be weighted very strongly, and the second
rule’s target point, s2.True, will be weighted very slightly. The cells
of s2 will take on essentially the values of the pattern point s2.False
so that the next state point in s2, s2.state(t+1), will have that value
at the beginning of the next cycle. In other words, True maps to
False. Similarly, if we set s1.state(t) to s1.False, then s2.state(t+1)
will be forced to s2.True, and False maps to True. These two results
are all that we need to have a logical “NOT” function.
As a practical matter, the operation of these two rules is such that
any point in s1 that is not almost exactly halfway between s1.True
and s1.False will force the state point of s2 to exactly one or the
other state. The entire s1 space is thus essentially divided into two
regions, the one that maps to s2.True and the one that maps to
s2.False.
Logical Completeness
CO machines are “logically complete.” Some people prefer the
equivalent term “Boolean complete.” Either way, a system that has
this property can implement every logical expression or Boolean
function. Such a system can be used to build any logical function.
To show that a system is logically complete, we only need to show
that the system can implement one set of logical functions that are
known to be logically complete. That implementation can then be
used to build any other logical function.
Logical “NAND”
Several different sets of logical functions are commonly used as the
basis for a claim that a system is logically complete. One such set is
the logical “AND,” the logical “OR,” and the logical “NOT.” We
have already shown how to implement logical “NOT” using a CO
72 Correlithm Object Technology
machine. We could proceed by showing how to implement these
other two logical functions, but this would require a total of twelve
rules, two for the “NOT” and four each for the “AND” and “OR.”
Another logically complete set of logical functions is the single
logical function “NOT-AND” or “NAND.” Early computers were
implemented largely with “NAND” functions because “NAND”
functions were the simplest and easiest to build with the electronic
components of the day. Here is the “NAND” function as a set of CO
rules. The pictorial equivalent is shown in Figure VI-2.
s1.F s2.F >: s3.T
s1.F s2.T >: s3.T
s1.T s2.F >: s3.T
s1.T s2.T >: s3.F
T
T T
F F
F
s1 s2 s3
Figure VI-2 Here is the logical NAND function. Pairings of points in s1 and
s2 map to points in s3. The white circles represent state points, illustrating
here that s1.T with s2.F maps to s3.T.
The “NAND” code consists of four rules. Each rule has two tokens
on the source side and one on the target side. Consider the first rule:
s1.F s2.F >: s3.T
Chapter 6 Completeness 73
The first term on the source side of the rule, s1.F, represents a soft
token, the randomly selected point F in the subspace s1. The second
term, s2.F, represents a distinct soft token, another randomly
selected point F in the subspace s2. Notice that there is no ambiguity
about calling both points by the same name, “F”, because they are in
different spaces. Similarly, the term on the target side of the rule,
s3.T, is a label for a third distinct soft token, a randomly selected
point T in subspace s3. The rule instructs the system to watch for the
appearance of both of the two source soft tokens in their respective
subspaces. Whenever that happens, the rule causes the generation of
the designated target soft token. Similar descriptions apply to the
other three rules. This set of four rules effectively implements the
functionality of a “NAND” gate. CO machines are therefore
logically (or Boolean) complete, and any logical function can be
built using a CO machine.
No Perceptron Limitations
The Perceptron is an early computing paradigm with biological
origins. In 1969, it was shown8
 that this model could not compute
certain important functions. Because the CO architecture also has
biological origins, it is important to emphasize that it does not suffer
from the limitations found in Perceptrons. These limitations derive
directly from the fact that a Perceptron is a linear device. It has been
amply demonstrated in the field of Connectionism or Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs) that relaxing this linear constraint
removes the limitations on what Perceptrons can do. To show that a
system does not have these Perceptron limitations, we only need to
show that the system can implement any function that cannot be
implemented by a Perceptron. The simplest example of such a
function, and one that was cited in the book, is the logical
“Exclusive-OR” or “XOR” function.
Logical “XOR”
An XOR function cannot be implemented by a linear system. As a
plausibility argument for this, consider the four coordinates (0,0),

8 Perceptrons: an Introduction to Computational Geometry, Marvin Minsky and
Seymour Papert, MIT Press 1969.
74 Correlithm Object Technology
(0,1), (1,0), and (1,1) which represent the four possible inputs to an
XOR. To specify an XOR, we associate a 0 with both (0,0) and
(1,1), and we associated a 1 with both (0,1) and (1,0). It is not
possible to place a single straight line in the plane of the input
coordinates such that both 1s are on one side of the line and both 0s
are on the other. This suggests that the XOR function is not linearly
partitionable, a result that can be proved rigorously. See Figure VI3.
However, it is trivial to place a line that has both 0s on one side and
both 1s on the other, if the line is not required to be straight. This is
what we mean by “relaxing the linear constraint.” Any system that
can implement any curved line in a plane can be manipulated so that
the line it generates partitions the output 0s and 1s.
(0,0)
(0,1) (1,1)
(1,0)
?
 (0,0)
(0,1) (1,1)
(1,0)
Figure VI-3 Here is the logical XOR function. The numbers in parentheses
are the coordinates of the input values plotted on a two-dimensional plane.
The black points are resulting values of zero, while the white points are ones.
At the left, we suggest that the zeroes cannot be separated from the ones by
any straight line. However, as seen on the right, it is trivial to separate the
zeroes from the ones with a curved line.
We can therefore show that a CO machine does not have the
limitations of a Perceptron simply by showing how to code the
logical “XOR” function. Here it is.
Chapter 6 Completeness 75
s1.Zero s2.Zero >: s3.Zero
s1.Zero s2.One >: s3.One
s1.One s2.Zero >: s3.One
s1.One s2.One >: s3.Zero
Turing Completeness
A Von Neumann machine is “Turing complete.” In essence, this
means that a Von Neumann machine is capable of computing
anything that can be computed. We will close this chapter by
arguing that a CO machine is also Turing complete. This conclusion
means that anything that can be done with either architecture can be
done with the other. But the two architectures are good (and bad) at
different things, as we will see later. This fact together with the fact
that both are Turing complete allows them to complement each
other in many areas.
Rigorously proving Turing completeness can be quite a chore. One
must basically show that the machine in question can implement a
particular theoretical construct called a Universal Turing Machine.
Fortunately, our argument is much simpler. While it does not
provide the rigor that “purists” demand, the argument is correct.
Flip-Flop
It is widely known and accepted that today’s digital computers are
“Turing complete.” These machines are all built from exactly two
types of devices, passive Boolean logic and one-bit memory devices
(“flip-flops”). We showed above that a CO machine can implement
any function of Boolean logic. If we now show that a CO machine
can implement a flip-flop, we in effect show that a CO machine can
implement any of today’s computers, because we will have shown
that we can build all of the components we need. Thus, to show that
a CO machine is Turing complete, we must now show how to build
a CO flip-flop. (See Figure VI-4.) Here are the rules that do it.
76 Correlithm Object Technology
# CO flip-flop:
# state latch
s2.p1 >: s2.p1 # rule 1: remember s2.p1
s2.p0 >: s2.p0 # rule 2: remember s2.p0
# control (s1 must have more dimensions than s2)
s1.p1 >: s2.p1 # rule 3: force s2 state to s2.p1
s1.p0 >: s2.p0 # rule 4: force s2 state to s2.p0
p1
p0
s1 s2
p0
p1
r1
r2
r3
r4
Figure VI-4 Here is a conceptual drawing of a flip-flop. The state point in s2
is the state of the flip-flop. If the state point in s1 is far from either p0 or p1,
then rules r3 and r4 have no effect on it, and the “latching” rules of s2, rules
r1 and r2, cause the s2 state point to move rapidly to the nearer of p0 or p1.
But s1 is a larger space (has more dimensions) than s2. If the s1 state point
moves inside either of the white circles, then the corresponding rule, r3 or r4,
becomes stronger than the current latching rule in s2, r1 or r2, and the state
point in s2 takes the value given by the s1 rule, where it stays until the other
s1 rule should fire.
Memory is the significant advantage that a flip-flop has over simple
Boolean logic. A flip-flop can “remember” or store for multiple
clock cycles a particular bit of data. Memory for this flip-flop is
carried by the first two rules, which together implement a “two-state
Chapter 6 Completeness 77
latch.” Suppose that the state point for s2, s2.p(t), has the value
s2.p1. The first rule will match strongly, while the second rule will
be weak. The first rule causes the state point to remain at the value
s2.p1. Similarly, if the state point for s2 were somehow to acquire
the value s2.p0, then the second rule would dominate the first, and
the state point would remain at the value s2.p0. Thus, each of these
two rules “latches” the state point to a particular and distinct point in
s2. If the state point ever “falls” into one of these two “attractor
wells,” it will not leave them without help. The state point will thus
“remember” whichever “well” it falls into, which is a two-state or a
one-bit memory.
Now consider the third and fourth rules, which map points in s1 to
points in s2. Suppose that the state of s2 is latched at s2.p0, and
suppose that the state of s1 is very near s1.p1. In this case, rules 2
and 3 will be strong and rules 1 and 4 will be weak. But rule 2 wants
the state of s2 to be s2.p0, while rule 3 wants the state of s2 to be
s2.p1. What happens? If s1 and s2 have about the same number of
dimensions, then the state of s2 will be highly unstable, even
chaotic. But suppose we deliberately build s1 with significantly
more dimensions than s2. Then, rule 3 can provide a much larger
weight for its target pattern point than rule 2. Even if the state point
exactly matches the pattern point in rule 2, rule 3 can overwhelm it
with “merely” a near match.
To see this, suppose that s2 has 100 dimensions and s1 has 200. We
know that each dimension can supply about 4 bits of information.
(See the “Bit Content of Proximity” in Table III-1 in Chapter III.)
Bits are defined as “minus log of probability,” or “log of reciprocal
probability,” so 2 raised to the power of “bits” is just reciprocal
probability. The largest weight that s2 can produce is about 2(4*100)
or 2400 while s1 can produce up to 2(4*200) or 2800. Standard distance
for s2 is 100 6 or about 4.08, while standard distance for s1 is
200 6 or about 5.77. If the match in s1 produces a distance of less
than 1.69 (or equivalently, a distance from standard distance of
more than 4.08), then rule 3 will overwhelm rule 2.
78 Correlithm Object Technology
If rule 3 overwhelms rule 2, then the state point in s2 will switch
from s2.p0 to s2.p1, and it will stay there as long as rule 3 is
dominant and even afterwards. Only if rule 4 becomes dominant will
the state of s2 switch back to s2.p0, and then it will remain in that
state until rule 3 again dominates.
Thus, we have demonstrated how to build a one-bit CO flip-flop.
We can build as many flip-flops as we want by duplicating these
flip-flop rules and providing new spaces for each set.
The ability to build flip-flops together with the ability to build any
logical function gives us the ability to implement any current-day
computer. Since these are known to be Turing complete, we
conclude that CO machines are Turing complete as well.
Correlithm Object Technology
79
Chapter VII Strings
We have been focusing on individual points in a unit
N-cube. In high school geometry, we learned that
lines are composed of points. In fact, so are all
geometrical objects, including simple shapes, such as
rectangles or spheres, and more complicated shapes,
such as a plate of spaghetti. Here we explore string
correlithm objects, which are sets of points in a unit
N-cube, where geometrical shapes define which
points are in the sets.
A pattern frequently has a geometric relationship
among its features. We can recognize “two eyes, a
nose, and a mouth” as a “face,” but we will call it a
“face” only if these objects are in about the proper
positions with respect to one another. String COs
provide means to represent such relationships within
a CO system. Often, the geometric relationship is a
time or sequence relationship. It makes quite a
difference whether I say, “Ready, aim, fire” or
“Ready, fire, aim”! String COs deal with these kinds
of patterns as well.
Thus far, we have focused on individual points in high-dimensional
bounded spaces. In this chapter, we extend our discussion to include
sets of points, such as lines, surfaces, and volumes. For obscure
historical reasons, we call these sets of points “string COs,” and we
refer to this general subject under the collective term, “strings.” The
word, “string,” is simply a label. It does not necessarily imply
anything that one might ordinarily associate with the word.
The subject of strings is extensive. It deserves at least an entire book
of its own. All that we can hope to do here is to provide a gentle
introduction. The complete, exhaustive treatise will have to wait.
80 Correlithm Object Technology
Strings deal with geometry. With a string CO, we can embed a
lower-order geometrical object, such as a square or a sphere, in a
higher-order correlithm object space so that distance measured
within the lower-order object is reflected as corresponding distance
in the CO space. For example, if we use string concepts to embed
the board from a game of checkers into a CO space, the distance
from any square to any other will be proportionately the same
whether we measure using the board itself, or the embedded image
of the board in the CO space. The distances in the CO space will be
approximate, because a string CO is a statistical object just as a
point CO is.
We can map string COs and point COs in various ways. If we map
an entire string CO to a single point CO, then the point CO can be
used in pattern generation or recognition as a soft token representing
the string CO. If we map a string CO to another string CO, then we
relate the former with the latter under a mathematical
transformation, or “morph” one geometrical object into another.
String COs have many uses. We can represent geometrical objects in
CO space. Because string COs have “capture zones” around them
that are similar in nature to those around point COs, a single string
CO can capture the approximate shape of an object so that any
similarly-shaped object will match. Any set of features with a
geometrical relationship can be mapped to a string CO, so seemingly
unrelated things such as color, local shape, texture, and so forth can
be represented in both their natures and their relative positions by a
string CO. This amounts to a powerful data fusion capability.
String Concepts
Perhaps the most basic concept of strings is to provide mappings
between a geometrical object, G, and a single point, P. The object,
G, may be any set of points, including straight and curved line
segments, planar segments, surface segments, regular and irregular
volumes, even arbitrary collections of points. G may be defined in
any number of dimensions, but small integer numbers are most
common. The single point, P, is a CO, a point typically selected at
random in a suitably high-dimensional bounded space such as a real
Chapter VII Strings 81
unit N-cube. The mappings may be strictly from G to P, strictly
from P to G or bi-directionally between G and P. The mappings
must be done in a way that causes small deformations of G to map
continuously to points that are small distances from P so that degree
of change in G is reflected as distance in P. The deformations may
include translations, rotations, magnifications, distortions or other
small changes, or combinations of these. The deformations may also
include noise in many forms. See Figure VII-1.
G3
G4
G2
G1
P4
P3
P2
P1
Figure VII-1 A string correlithm object maps a geometrical object to a
random CO.
Under the string concept, we are not simply trying to capture
membership in G. We can already do that with COs. We do not need
strings to accomplish membership. If G is a finite set of points, we
can write an equal number of rules to map every one of those points
to the single point P. If the state point in G’s space moves to a point
of G, or even if it moves to a point very near to a point of G, then
the rule associated with that point will become strong and the state
point in P’s space will become P or very near to P.
With strings, we are trying to capture the geometrical
characteristics of G. This is reminiscent of Aristotle’s “formal
cause” in philosophy. Aristotle gives the example of the “chair-
82 Correlithm Object Technology
ness” of a chair. It is hard to specify exactly why a chair “looks like”
a chair, but we humans “know a chair when we see one.” Similarly,
in the string concept we are interested in “G-ness.” We want G, and
anything that “looks like G,” to be associated with the single point
P, or a point very near to P.
Let’s see what is involved in generating the geometrical pattern of a
face, referred to as G, by capturing its geometrical characteristics in
a point, P, and its related strings. Ultimately, the mapping between
G and P will turn out to be a hierarchy of mappings between the
more subtle and detailed aspects of the geometric form, or “lesser
Gs”, and a string of Ps to represent those detailed, subtle
characteristics, or “lesser Ps.” More detailed levels of pattern
generation will require more P strings.
A particular geometrical relationship between two eyes, a nose, and
a mouth is a “face” to most people. (See Figure VII-2.) Let’s call the
facial features “elements.” Although small variations in the relative
locations of the eyes, nose, and mouth can be made without
destroying its “face-ness,” larger variations in the positions of these
elements will cause most people to stop calling the ensemble a
“face.”

Figure VII-2 Even though the image elements remain the same, move them
much from their “expected” relative locations, and most people will fail to see
a face.
Most people would describe this cartoon face as “two eyes about
here and here, a nose about here, and a mouth about here.” Suppose
we have the ability to recognize eyes, noses, and mouths anywhere
in an image. We still need a way to capture their approximate
relative locations, the idea of “here.” This is done with a string CO.
The relative locations of the elements are assembled into a set of
point COs that, together with their relative geometric coordinates,
Chapter VII Strings 83
form an appropriate string CO, G. The string CO, G, is then mapped
to single point CO, P, that represents the ensemble. Therefore, the
point, P, is a single token at the top of an organizational hierarchy
representing a face.
Note that in this example, string COs represent geometrical
relationships that exist among point COs. Thus, string COs can
capture geometrical relationships among any kind of elements,
including real world objects, point COs, and other string COs.
The hierarchical organization of a face illustrated here can be
extended to both higher and lower levels. (See Figure VII-3.) We
can define an eye as a particular geometric relationship between
elements that make up an eye, as in “eyelashes here and here, a
pupil here,” and so forth. We need to capture the approximate
relative locations of these elements in order to define an eye.
Moving up the hierarchy, we can define a human form that includes
“a face here, two arms here and here,” and so forth. At the top of the
hierarchy is a single point that represents an entire, complex
arrangement of elements that is given a single name. At the bottom
of the hierarchy are myriads of tiny elements at the limits of
perception. The unifying whole is the approximate relative locations
of all of these elements.
String COs are robust representations of geometrical objects. The
elements can vary somewhat in position, and some elements can be
wildly out of position, or be missing altogether, and the ensemble
will still generate a state point, P’, that is near the pattern point, P,
which represents the face. By applying the string CO concept, we
systematically transform a problem of assessing geometrical
similarity into a problem of measuring the distance between two
points, the pattern point, P, representing an example of the
geometrical arrangement, and the state point, P’, representing the
current geometrical arrangement of the elements.
Notice that this hierarchy can be traversed both upwards, which is a
“pattern recognition” direction, and downwards, which is a “pattern
generation” direction. We often say that CO systems can “see and
84 Correlithm Object Technology
do things that are like things previously seen and done.” Most
readers are probably familiar with the pattern recognition direction
where patterns are fit to known pattern classes. But readers may be
less familiar with the pattern generation direction, where a behavior
class produces an output pattern adapted to current conditions.
String CO systems produce adaptive pattern generation readily and
reliably, but adaptive pattern generation by more conventional
means is difficult and uncertain at best. It is hard, for example, to get
a conventionally-controlled robot to walk reliably on unfamiliar
terrain.
Figure VII-3 An image is composed of a hierarchy of elements with
particular geometric relationships. At each level of the hierarchy, string COs
can capture the relationships. Thus both geometry and hierarchy are
represented.
It should now be clear why approximate mapping of relative
location is a key capability. We already have in point COs the ability
to reliably apply labels to state points that are small distances from
their pattern points. By adding the ability to reliably map
approximate relative location, we have all that we need to build the
kinds of hierarchies described above. The mapping of G to P in the
large sense is then a matter of engineering. How many levels of
hierarchy will be used, how many and what kinds of elements will
be used at each level, and what kinds and degree of variation will we
allow in location and in element match?
Chapter VII Strings 85
Approximate Relative Location
Let us focus on the “relative” part of approximate relative location.
An element can be relative to another element, but it can also be
relative to a particular reference point or origin. The two are
equivalent, and either form can easily be converted into the other
with simple geometrical mathematics. If we choose to relate all
elements to an origin, then we do not have to consider combinations
of elements, only the absolute position of each element with respect
to the origin.
Figure VII-4 Humans are not very good at recognizing letters that are not
centered on the eye’s focus point or foveal spot. Here we illustrate how
recognition of the letter “A” degrades with radial distance from that spot. If
the eye is focused on the sharp letter “A” in the center, then even nearby
letters quickly become unrecognizable. We use focus here to represent this
loss of discrimination, but the cause of the degradation in humans is actual
perceptual loss, not simply a loss of focus.
There is ample evidence of the use of “origins” in living systems.
For example, the human eye moves to center the image it sees on
“something interesting.” The sensitive central point in the visual
field is called the “foveal spot” or simply the “fovea.” The exact
details are irrelevant, but it is well known that we humans do not
recognize shapes, such as letters, very well if they are even a few
degrees “off fovea.” (See Figure VII-4.) The elements of a letter
hierarchy are evidently related by relative location to the origin
86 Correlithm Object Technology
represented by the center of the fovea itself. Many other examples of
fovea-like phenomena in human perception could be given. It is a
widespread tool in our perceptual framework.
It is enough, therefore, to deal with relative location with respect to
some previously selected origin, such as the center of the fovea in
the eye. Later on, we can worry about how to place the origin
correctly, but for now, we will assume that has already been done.
We also need a coordinate system centered on the origin, in order to
define locations with respect to it.
We can now state the problem of mapping approximate relative
location. Given an origin, a coordinate system related to that origin,
and some point, g, in the coordinate system, associate CO p with g,
such that points near g are associated continuously with points near
p, with points closer to g producing points closer to p.
For example, consider space, s1, with pattern point, g, on a unit line
in s1 that has the origin placed at the left end of the line, and an
associated pattern point, p, in a suitable high-dimensional space s2.
We want to achieve the behavior shown in Figure VII-5. Suppose
we move the state point g’ in s1 along the line so that it passes
through g. We want each value of g’ to produce a corresponding
state point p’ in s2 that has the indicated functional distance
relationship to p. While g’ is “far away” from g, p’ is at standard
distance from p. As g’ closely approaches g, the distance between p’
and p goes to zero.
To produce this behavior, we use “sampling.” We set up a series of
K rules that “sample” this functional relationship. The rules can be
defined in the following way:
s1.h[i] >: s2.q[i], i=1..K, s1.h[i=n] = s1.g, and s2.g[i=n] = s2.p
Notice that one of these K rules, namely the one where i=n, maps g
to p. Having this exact rule is not strictly necessary. It is only
necessary that the sampling produce rules that are “close” to this
rule so that the mapping of g to p is adequately represented.
Chapter VII Strings 87
f=0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p' in s2
g' in s1 g
p Distance
between
p' and p
Figure VII-5 We are given that pattern point g in space s1 maps to pattern
point p in space s2. As the s1 state point, g’, is moved in s1 along a line
through g, the mapping causes the s2 state point, p’, to follow a path through
p in s2. The graph indicates the distance between p’ and p as a function of the
distance between g’ and g. When g’ is not near g, then p’ is standard distance
from p. Only when g’ is near g does p’ approach p.
Suppose each of the points in both s1 and s2 are random COs, and
suppose that the state point g’ in s1 is set to s1.h[i=n] = s1.g. Then
the rules will produce state point p’ in s2 which is at about standard
distance from each of the s2.q[i] except s2.q[i=n] = s2.p, where the
distance will be zero. This has the sort of functional relationship we
seek, but we would like for the “notch” at i=n to be wider.
This can be achieved to whatever degree we like by building a string
CO in s1.
To construct the string CO in s1, we move the points s1.h[i] closer
together than standard distance. We pick s1.h[1] at random just as
we would any CO, but then we pick s1.h[2] to be closer to s1.h[1]
than standard distance. Exactly how to do this can be a complex
88 Correlithm Object Technology
topic, and we will leave its development for subsequent works9
. Our
focus here is on what happens if this is in fact done.
Similarly, we move the points s2.p[i] correspondingly closer
together than standard distance.
Suppose we arrange things so that the distance between s1.h[i] and
s1.h[i+1] is fraction f of standard distance in s1, where 0 < f <= 1.
Again let g’ be set to s1.g. Again, we see that p’ has zero distance to
s2.p because the rule
s1.g >: s2.p
is the strongest rule, but now the distances to the two points
immediately on either side of s2.p are both much less than standard
distance. The two rules that control these points, namely
s1.h[i=n-1] >: s2.q[i=n-1]
s1.h[i=n+1] >: s2.q[i=n+1]
are both relatively strong, since we have forced their s1 pattern
points to be closer than standard distance to s1.g. As we consider
rules increasingly further away from i=n, distance increases in s2
asymptotically to standard distance. The smaller we make f, the
wider the “notch” becomes. This is illustrated in Figure VII-6.
Understand that the notch will follow the state point g’ as it moves
along the path of the line, the space s1 sample points, h[i], i=1..K.
Moreover, if g’ is not on this path, then the bottom of the notch will

9 A few comments about this process are in order. The problem of building string
COs is subtler than it may appear. Many things that one may initially think of to
try have unexpected and undesirable side effects. For example, one might select
two random COs, a and b in space s1, then perform a simple linear interpolation
of their coordinates to produce intermediate COs. This indeed produces roughly
the functional form we seek. But it turns out that the intermediate COs produced
in this way are closer than standard distance to any third CO, c, selected at
random. The interpolation actually “takes a shortcut” through the space s1 that
produces this behavior, which is almost certainly not what we want.
Chapter VII Strings 89
not go to zero. As g’ moves to the value of a random CO in s1, the
notch disappears entirely. (See Figure VII-7.)
1
7
13
19
25
31
37
43
49
55
61
67
73
79
85
91
97
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Fraction of Standard Distance
Points
f=0.7
f=0.8
f=0.9
f=1.0
Figure VII-6 Distance as a fraction, f, of standard distance in s2 as rules get
further away from strongest. Decreasing f makes the “notch” wider.
1
12
23
34
45
56
67
78
89
100
0
0.5
1
Fraction of
Standard Distance
Points
Figure VII-7 As the state point moves away from the string CO, the depth of
the notch shrinks. In the plot at the front, the state point in s1 is exactly on
the string CO, exactly matching one of its rules and producing a state point in
s2 that is at zero distance from the pattern point of that rule. In the plot at
the rear, the state point in s1 is at standard distance from the string CO, so
all of the rules produce points in s2 that are standard distance from the state
point in s2.
90 Correlithm Object Technology
Ordinality
One use for such a one-dimensional string CO is ordinality. As an
example of the concept, (see Figure VII-8), suppose we build a onedimensional string CO of twenty-six points and adjust their spacing
so that the first and the twenty-sixth are closer together than
standard distance. Thus, the distance between any two of them will
be less than standard distance, and distance will increase uniformly
in both directions of the sequence away from any particular one of
the string CO points. Now label the first point with “A,” the second
with “B,” and so forth, labeling the twenty-sixth with “Z.” Suppose
we set the state point in the space of this string CO to the point
corresponding to “C.” The distance to each point then reflects our
own intuition about the ordinal distance of the corresponding letter.
Thus, “B” is closer to “C” than “A,” and “D” is closer to “C” than
“E.”
In the same manner, suppose we define a string CO for the Cyrillic
alphabet in the same space. All of the points in this Cyrillic string
CO will be at standard distance from all of the points of the English
string CO.10 If we set the state point for the space to the Cyrillic
character, “Җ,” (the “zh” sound), the distances to the other points
representing Cyrillic characters will be ordinal. But the distances
from the state point to every point in the English string CO will all
be about standard distance.
Now set up rules that map all of the English string CO points to a
single random CO labeled “English Letters” in a new space and map
all of the Cyrillic string CO points to another single random CO
labeled “Cyrillic Letters” in the new space. If the state point gets
near either string CO, the corresponding state point in the new space
will approach the corresponding one of these two random COs. This
will tell us whether we are seeing English or Cyrillic characters. To
continue this notion add two new rules that map both random COs

10 Remember that all members of a given string CO are at standard distance from
every random CO in the space, except each other. This happens automatically due
to the geometric probabilities involved. All COs are at about standard distance
from one another unless we intervene to change that fact.
Chapter VII Strings 91
to a single random CO is a third space, which will be approached by
its state point whenever either an English or a Cyrillic string CO
point is approached in the first space. This is illustrated in Figure
VII-9.
A
А
Б Ж
Ю Я
Z
Y
H
B
Figure VII-8 Here we see two string COs defined in the same space, one for
the English alphabet and one for the Cyrillic. Every point on each string CO
is about standard distance from every point on the other string CO. Within
each string CO, alphabetically adjacent points are very close together in the
space. Points that are more distant alphabetically are more distant in the
space.
Higher Dimensions
Approximate relative location is not useful just in one dimension,
but in higher dimensions as well. The previous example of a face
composed of eyes, nose, and mouth requires approximate relative
location in two dimensions if we are dealing with a drawing or
photograph and three dimensions if we are dealing with a solid
figure. Even higher dimensionalities are often needed. We will
confine our discussion to two dimensions and simply assert that
92 Correlithm Object Technology
higher dimensional string COs are straightforward extensions of the
concepts shown here.
A
А Б Ж Ю Я
H Y Z B
English
Cyrillic
Alphabet
Figure VII-9 Every point in the string CO representing the English alphabet
maps to the single CO labeled “English.” This enables us to represent the fact
that any of these English letters is a member of the English alphabet.
Similarly, we handle the Cyrillic alphabet. Both of the target points are then
mapped to the single CO labeled “Alphabet,” which lets us represent the
knowledge that any of the letters of either English or Cyrillic are alphabetic
objects. Note that “A” is the first letter in both alphabets. Given “A,” the
rules would cause both the Cyrillic and English COs to be at equal strength.
We would know confidently that the letter is a member of one of the two
alphabets, but it would require additional information to say to which
alphabet the particular letter in question belongs.
How do we code approximate relative location in two dimensions?
First, let us extend our previous problem formulation from one
dimension to two. For one dimension, we defined the problem in
this way. “Given an origin, a coordinate system related to that
origin, and some point, g, in the coordinate system, associate CO p
with g such that points near g are associated continuously with
Chapter VII Strings 93
points near p, with points closer to g producing points closer to p.”
This problem statement works equally well for one dimension, two
dimensions or even more.
Let us deal with a square having the origin at the lower left corner,
with each edge of unit length. Call this space s1 and place pattern
point g somewhere within it. Associate a pattern point p in a suitable
high-dimensional space s2. We want to achieve the behavior shown
in Figure VII-10.
Figure VII-10 Here is the desired behavior for 2D approximate relative
position mapping. The point, g, has been selected in the unit square in space
s1. If the state point for s1 is placed at g, then the distances to the points in s2
should be about what is shown in the surface, a “cone” around g that
asymptotically approaches standard distance. To help visualize the situation,
approximate contour lines of the statistical surface are shown in the square.
Note that the z-axis origin in this illustration is well above the plane of the
unit square.

g
94 Correlithm Object Technology
There are two coordinates for g, the x coordinate and the y
coordinate. One possible strategy for defining rules is to set up a
one-dimensional string CO for each coordinate, then concatenate
them to form one point in s2.
s1.(x,y) >: s2.gx[x] s2.gy[y], x=1..X, y=1..Y
One of the things we want for the string COs in both spaces is for
the “cone” of distance around a given point to be symmetrical. This
means that if a given point g at (x,y) in s1 maps to p in s2, then all
points at the same radial distance, r, from g in s1 will map to points
in s2 that are all about the same distance from p.
Figure VII-11 These distance “troughs” arise when trying to build a 2D
string CO by concatenating two 1D string COs that correspond respectively
to the x and y coordinates of a point in the unit square.
This simple strategy fails. (See Figure VII-11.) Since directions
parallel to the x and y axes in the unit square produce no changes in
the values of the corresponding 1D string COs, distance in s2 is not
increased by that string CO. Only the other string CO contributes to
distance in s2 in this circumstance, and the result is decidedly not
symmetric.
Chapter VII Strings 95
Figure VII-12 Here is another approach that fails. A point in s1 is coded into
s2 by building a coarse grid of random COs, then interpolating among the
four that bound the point. The “sags” are caused by the interpolation
process, which “takes a shortcut” through the high dimensional space of s2.
Another simple strategy also fails. (See Figure VII-12.) We might
try laying out a coarse grid of random COs across the unit square,
then doing a linear combination of the random COs at the four
corners that bound the point of interest, g at (x,y). This indeed works
reasonably well for points within those four corners, and the grid of
random points itself does indeed produce standard distances, but
there are “sags” in the surface. These are caused by the same
problem that plagued interpolation in the 1D case, namely the fact
that such interpolations produce points that “take a shortcut” through
s2. The result is that interpolated points are not at about standard
distance.
Rest assured that there is at least one good solution to this problem.
It would take more space than is reasonable here to investigate it in
detail, but the essence of the solution is to distribute the kinds of
problems and anomalies we have just seen randomly across the
96 Correlithm Object Technology
space to be coded. The result is computationally efficient, even
though the algorithm is not simple to describe. But once again,
randomness “comes to the rescue.”
Comments
As promised, this has been a “gentle” introduction to a very
complex subject. We have left out many things. For example, the
simple line segment and planar patch string COs presented here can
be “looped.” That is, the ends of the line segment can be joined to
form a continuous space, a ring. Similarly, one or both of the edges
of the planar patch can be joined to its opposite. If this is done in
one dimension only, a tube results. If it is done in both dimensions,
the result is a torus. Any continuous object in any number of
dimensions can be dealt with, so string CO coding is very general.
The ability to represent and to relate geometrical objects in ways
that map deformations of a given object to distances from the point
CO that represents that given object provides a powerful tool for
representing and generating patterns. It gives us the ability to
construct hierarchies of patterns by giving specific examples, and
the security of knowing that anything “like” the examples we give
will also be robustly recognized. Such a hierarchy can be traversed
toward its root to obtain robust pattern classifications, and toward its
leaves to produce robust behavioral patterns that accommodate
variations in encountered situations.
Finally, it should now be obvious that string COs, and therefore CO
machines in general, have a natural, innate ability to represent
continuous, analog processes. A CO machine is very different from
a traditional computer, with different strengths and weaknesses, as
we will see shortly.
Correlithm Object Technology
97
Chapter VIII Architecture
CO systems run best on special multiple-machine
computing resources. When we make popcorn, we do
not pop the kernels one at a time because it would
take too long. The tasks inside a CO system are like
kernels of corn. We can “pop” them all at once. A
standard digital computer runs only one task at a
time, and it cannot finish the tasks of a CO system
very quickly. But a CO system runs fast on any
computing resource that runs many tasks at once,
such as a “grid” of internet computer sites or a set of
digital signal processors (DSPs), and there are even
better designs on the drawing board.
The combination of a CO system and one of these
multiple-machine computing resources has many
unique properties. The CO system itself just goes on
working correctly even if large numbers of the
multiple processors fail. There is no need to
reconfigure the computing resource or even to detect
the failures. We can run multiple CO systems at the
same time on the same set of machines, and they
won’t interfere with each other. This is not “timesharing” or “distributed processing” as it is
commonly known, but something more like a
hologram. We can even establish the kind of “group
mind” found in the determination and purpose of a
swarm of bees.
Correlithm Object (CO) systems feature computing resources that
are radically different from those of mainstream digital computers.
The resources are inherently concurrent and can benefit greatly from
concurrent implementations. CO systems have unique properties of
robustness, sampling, superposition and even holographic-like
characteristics, as well as others.
98 Correlithm Object Technology
The fundamental architectural unit of a CO system is the cell, which
carries a time-varying state that is an independent function defined
on the states of some set of cells. Potentially, no two cells have
identically the same functionality. System behavior emerges from
statistical properties involving individual cell functionality, the
organization of the cells, and the flow of their intercommunications.
In a strong sense, each cell has a unique “point of view.” A cell
observes the states of other cells, compares those states to reference
states it has previously stored, and generates its output as a one
dimensional, time-varying “opinion” about the current situation.
From time to time, a cell may add to its pool of stored reference
states under various circumstances.
To approach an understanding of the nature of CO systems, one
should visualize a living brain. No single cell is ultimately
important. Although macroscopic functionality can be assigned to
various regions of cells in a brain, a detailed inspection of those cells
looks like nothing so much as noise and chaos. It is intuitively clear
that each brain cell is contributing something to the whole, but it is
anything but clear what a particular cell actually does from an
information processing perspective. CO systems are much the same.
This should come as no surprise, because CO systems were derived
from a theory of information processing in living neural systems,
and such systems remain a guiding light in the evolution of CO
technology.
The autonomy of individual cells and the emergent behavior of cell
ensembles present unique architectural capabilities and opportunities
that exist essentially independent of what processes the CO system
is actually performing. Many of these properties are worthy of study
and exploitation in their own right, not merely as a means to
enhance system performance. They offer new resources and
perspectives that can be brought to bear in a wide range of
applications, frequently providing robust and satisfying solutions to
long-standing, difficult problems. In addition, they offer new
directions of investigation that promise even more capability.
Chapter VIII Architecture 99
Serial Implementations
Given the widespread availability of digital computers, it was
inevitable that CO systems would appear first as programs for these
machines. We can view current computers as serial systems,
although it is not an entirely accurate description. Certain kinds of
concurrency are in fact being exploited in various places in these
machines, but their predominant behavior is the execution of a
single programmatic thread.
A current digital computer is perhaps the worst possible system to
host a CO process. CO behaviors emerge from the statistics of
ensembles. Producing these behaviors necessarily involves dealing
with large numbers of cells, rules, and communications channels. A
serial or single-thread computer must process this workload one
element at a time. Worse, the elements are all essentially
independent at several logical levels and fully capable of correct
behavior with little synchronization among them, a situation that
simply begs for high levels of concurrent processing. A CO system
will potentially run many orders of magnitude faster on appropriate
concurrent hardware than on a serial machine. See Figure VIII-1.

Figure VIII-1 CO systems run faster on concurrent computing resources,
such as the one represented on the right, because CO systems are inherently
concurrent.
Still, current computers are ubiquitous, and a CO system will
execute correctly on one. But many of the interesting properties that
we discuss below will be weak or unavailable on current computers.
Properly concurrent host computers for CO systems will need to be
developed to take full advantage of these capabilities. Fortunately,
100 Correlithm Object Technology
there are a few hardware opportunities available even today that are
more appropriate hosts for CO systems, including DSP (Digital
Signal Processing) and FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Array)
integrated circuits, multi-CPU machines, clusters and distributed
computing, Grid computing, and the like. In the future, we expect to
see purpose-built CO integrated circuits and even the intriguing
possibility of a purely analog CO machine.
Concurrent Implementations
Within a CO system, there are at least three levels of concurrency
available for exploitation. A CO system executes a set of rules. All
rules can be executed concurrently. All rule source sides can be
executed concurrently. All target cells can be executed concurrently.
See Figure VIII-2.
Concurrent
Rules
a[1].p >: b[1].q
a[2].p >: b[2].q
…
a[i].p >: b[i].q
Concurrent
Source Cells
a.p >: b.q
a.state[1] vs. a.p[1]
a.state[2] vs. a.p[2]
…
a.state[j] vs. a.p[j]
Concurrent
Target Cells
a.p >: b.q
a.state vs. a.p →
 → b.q[1]
 → b.q[2]
 …
 → b.q[k]
Figure VIII-2 CO systems have available at least three kinds of
concurrency. Rules can be concurrent because any rule can be executed
independent of any other rule. Within a rule, the comparison of the pattern
CO with its state CO contains concurrency at the cell level, and target cells
can be set independently of each other.
In the ultimately desirable CO system, all rules would operate
concurrently, asynchronously, and continuously. There would be no
CO machine “cycle,” no clock boundaries to trigger the execution of
rule sets. A cell would emit a value that is a continuous function of
Chapter VIII Architecture 101
time. Thus a rule’s source state point, which is comprised of the
values of cells, would also be a continuous function of time. A cell
should therefore continuously map the state it receives to its own
target value according to the source pattern points it has stored.
Source Cells Target Cells
Rule 1
Rule 2
Rule 3
Figure VIII-3 Rules can be executed concurrently. What a rule reads from a
source cell is not affected by what any other rule reads from that cell. The
internal processing of a rule depends only on the values read from source
cells. Rules may try to write different values to the same target cells, but the
formulas for computing new target cell values are deliberately incremental,
guaranteeing that target cell values “nominated” for a cell by various rules
are correctly handled.
From this, it should be clear that a rule’s operation is completely
independent of the operation of any other rule. (See Figure VIII-3.)
The role that a rule plays in the overall functionality of a CO system
is certainly not independent of other rules. But a rule’s operation is.
The sources and targets of rules may be interconnected in complex
ways, but a given rule can always compute its target value solely
from its source state and its source pattern points.
This means that rules can be executed concurrently. Certainly, there
are issues involved in ensuring that a rule plays the correct role in
overall CO system behavior, but the role of a rule does not
intrinsically impose any kind of rule execution order. If it did,
102 Correlithm Object Technology
concurrent rule execution would be harder, and the hardware
infrastructure that actually implements a CO system might become
dependent on the particular CO program that was being run, an
undesirable characteristic in a general-purpose machine. Fortunately,
executing rules concurrently presents no unsolvable problems.
Rule source sides can be executed concurrently. The operation of a
rule calls for the evaluation of the source, the distribution of the
resulting value to the target cells, and the incorporation of that value
by the target cells into their target values. Source evaluation
involves comparing the state point for the aggregate source to the
aggregate pattern point and developing a measure of proximity such
as distance, probability, or bits. Whether source evaluation is done
once and the result is passed to each of the target cells, or whether
duplicate source evaluation takes place in each target cell, the same
source evaluation happens. That evaluation involves dealing with
the coordinates of a high-dimensional source point. Typically, the
state value for each dimension is compared to the pattern value for
the same dimension. When all comparisons are complete, an
aggregation is performed to produce a single evaluation value.
Clearly, the state-to-pattern comparisons in the dimensions can
proceed concurrently. See Figure VIII-4.
There is another consideration. It is obviously more efficient for the
source side of a rule to be evaluated once than it is to have each
target cell independently evaluate the same source. But if the target
cells are truly to be autonomous, then each target cell must do its
own source side processing. If each target cell does this, it indeed
creates redundant work, but it also means that the target cells do not
have to synchronize their operation with the common source side
evaluation. This consideration is important in some CO systems. See
Figure VIII-5.
Chapter VIII Architecture 103
a.state
cells
a.pattern
cells
( 1 - 1 ) 2
( 2 - 2 ) 2
… …
( j - j ) 2
Sum Sqrt
Figure VIII-4 The comparison of a rule’s source pattern CO with the
corresponding state cells contains a significant opportunity to exploit
concurrency. The squared difference is independent for each cell index, so all
j of them can run concurrently in one step. Finally, we take the square root of
the sum of those results.
One Source Comparison
For All Target Cells
a.p >: b.q
 a.state vs. a.p →
 → b.q[1]
 → b.q[2]
 …
 → b.q[k]
Per Target Cell
a.p >: b.q
a.state vs. a.p → b.q[1]
a.state vs. a.p → b.q[2]
…
a.state vs. a.p → b.q[k]
Figure VIII-5 Normally, the source side of a rule is evaluated only once and
the result is distributed to each of the target cells, as shown on the left. But it
is possible for each target cell to perform this comparison for itself, if each
cell is supplied with source state information, as shown on the right. This can
be an advantage in systems where maximum target cell concurrency is
desired.
104 Correlithm Object Technology
Target cells can be executed concurrently. When we defined the
formal CO machine in Chapter V, we went to some length to ensure
that a target cell only needs to know its pattern points and the
evaluation of its source to compute its next target value. In
particular, it does not need to know what any of the other target cells
of the rule are doing. This is a design requirement that ensures that
target cells can indeed be executed concurrently. CO machine
definitions exist that are functionally workable but require target
cells to coordinate their activities. We excluded these definitions
precisely because we wanted to guarantee the ability to execute
target cells concurrently, which in turn affords us the opportunity to
exploit that concurrency.
Figure VIII-6 A typical use of a CO system is to create a “synthetic
organism” with information processing characteristics much like that of a
living creature. Often a “swarm” of such systems is needed, and they need to
operate independently and concurrently, just as living creatures do,
interacting among themselves through the environment.
Chapter VIII Architecture 105
An additional source of concurrency is usually available when
multiple CO systems are instantiated. The CO systems themselves
can be executed independently. A CO system behaves very much
like an individual living organism. To use a CO system, it is
necessary to provide some sort of environment in which it will
“live” and with which it will interact. Suppose a CO system were
built to emulate a honeybee. We could presumably instantiate many
of these “honeybee” CO systems within the same environment.
Although the activities of one honeybee may interact with the
activities of another, all of the honeybees should be active at the
same time. That is, they should be operated concurrently, and this
can typically be done with any CO system. See Figure VIII-6.
A straddler is our term for any CO system that is running on a
concurrent computing resource such as a multi-CPU computer, a
Grid computer, a LAN or even the internet itself. The CO system is
said to “straddle” the resource. The obvious intent when mapping a
CO system into a straddler is to exploit concurrency to make the CO
system run in less wall clock time. But we will see shortly that there
are other benefits as well.
Simple hardware acceleration can also be an effective way to exploit
concurrency. Software tools exist that can accept C/C++ source code
and produce efficient executable code for DSPs (Digital Signal
Processors). Similar tools are beginning to be available for FPGAs
(Field Programmable Gate Arrays). Both approaches can result in
significant performance gains compared to the same CO system
running on a serial computer.
Analog Implementations
CO systems have the ability to implement continuous functions
directly, as analog systems.
Designers go to great lengths in current digital computers to operate
the circuitry to avoid its active regions. Each digital component has
a continuous, “active” operating region bounded by two extreme
states, “full saturation” meaning conducting all that it can and “full
cutoff” meaning conducting essentially nothing at all. Analog
106 Correlithm Object Technology
computers employ the active region of components, but digital
computers avoid the active region and focus on the two extreme
states, because the theory of digital computation is a theory of
discrete values, not continuous ones.
Analog computers have perhaps existed longer than digital
computers, but knowledge of analog computation is not widespread
among computer scientists today. This is probably because
historically the most successful analog computers were machines
that solved differential equations and only differential equations.
Some control systems are still built today using analog hardware,
but increasingly, these are supplanted by digital systems that process
analog information by converting it to digital form, running
algorithms on fast digital hardware, and converting the results back
into analog form.

Figure VIII-7 Analog computers can be much faster than digital computers.
A cup of coffee “solves” complex equations of fluid dynamics typically much
faster than digital supercomputer simulations.
No general-purpose analog computer has ever gained prominence.
In fact, no such system even comes to mind. Yet such a system
might be very desirable. Analog processes are often inherently fast,
sometimes a lot faster than their digital counterparts. Consider a cup
of hot coffee. (See Figure VIII-7.) Suppose we stir it and then let a
drop of cream fall into it. The cream will disperse rapidly through
the hot coffee. Yet the discrete approximation that must be set up
and solved to simulate this dispersal on a digital computer is
daunting, and the computational time to produce a reasonable
Chapter VIII Architecture 107
approximation to the solution will be long, even on our fastest
digital hardware. Clearly there is a lot of computational power in a
simple cup of coffee. But how do we harness this power? How do
we build a general-purpose analog computer?
CO technology provides a means. CO machines are inherently
analog in nature. This seems reasonable since CO machines are
modeled after living neural systems that are definitely analog in
nature. The functionality of a rule involves only simple
mathematical operations that can all be readily implemented in
purely analog hardware. The basic computation is a distance
calculation between a state point and a pattern point. The pattern
point can be represented by preset analog quantities such as voltage
or current. The state point is similarly represented, but of course
varies over time. To compute distance, we first need to form
differences in each dimension, something readily done with a
differential amplifier. Then we square each difference, sum the
squares, and take a square root, all readily done with the same kind
of hardware. The remaining steps are equally simple mathematical
operations. And due to the strong noise tolerance of CO systems, the
typical two or perhaps three-decimal-digit accuracy of such
hardware is not a problem. There appears to be no significant
impediment to a purely analog implementation of rules. We have
already shown that CO systems are Turing complete, meaning that a
CO system can implement any process that can be computed. So a
general-purpose computer can apparently be built in purely analog
hardware by utilizing CO technology.
CO systems can also implement analog functions directly. Current
digital computers implement analog functions by means of
algorithms. They manipulate numbers that are in digital form. But
we know that CO systems do their work by directly mapping points
between spaces, a process that is of the essence of continuous
functionality. In the previous chapter on strings, we showed how to
approach the mapping of lines, curves, surfaces, and so forth to
themselves and similar objects. It would be easy, for example, to
construct string COs to implement a function such as y=x2
 through
mapping, simply by building two lines in separate spaces and
108 Correlithm Object Technology
mapping points (x values) placed with linear separations on the first
line to points (y values) placed with quadratic separations on the
second line. (See Figure VIII-8.) In this same manner, arbitrarily
complex functional relationships can be implemented directly by
what is essentially “table look-up and interpolation.”
Figure VIII-8 A quadratic function can be built by establishing two string
COs and writing rules for the mapping. Here a string CO in space s1 is
mapped to another string CO in space s2.
Currently, only two general techniques are available to computer
science to make (digital) computers run faster: (1) Build the same
thing out of faster parts, and (2) do more than one thing at a time.
This is the entire repertoire of the digital computer hardware
architect. Every architectural enhancement of digital computer
technology is the application of one or both of these principles. CO
technology may allow us to add a third principle to these first two,
namely, the direct use of the inherent speed of analog processes.
Properties and Capabilities
Here are some of the many new and unique things that one can do
with a CO system. The focus here will be on properties and
0 1 2 3 4
0 1 2 4 9 16
s1
s2
Chapter VIII Architecture 109
capabilities of the CO machine architecture, not on the CO
processing itself, which will be discussed in Chapter X.
Sampling
A sampled rule will operate correctly. This means that if a rule
operates correctly, then another rule whose spaces are subspaces of
the first rule—a sampled rule—will also operate correctly, provided
the subspaces are not too small.
Figure VIII-9 Here is a conceptual view of the idea of sampling. Two points
are shown in their respective three-dimensional spaces, and their shadows
are shown in the corresponding two-dimensional spaces. The left point is
mapped in 3-space to the right point, and the shadow of the left point is
correspondingly mapped in 2-space to the shadow of the right point. We can
think of the shadow mapping as a “sampling” of the point mapping.
A CO derives its primary properties from statistics defined on its
many dimensions. Properties found in high-dimensional COs begin
to emerge in COs that have only about 20 dimensions, and those
110 Correlithm Object Technology
properties rapidly become statistically robust as dimensionality
grows.
To illustrate the correct operation of a sampled rule, consider the
following two rules:
s1.p1 >: s3.p3
s2.p2 >: s3.p3
Both of these rules relate a source point to the same target point. Let
s1 have 2N dimensions and s2 have N dimensions. Suppose that
space s2 is a randomly drawn subset of space s1 and point s2.p2 is a
corresponding subset of point s1.p1. The source side of the second
rule is therefore a sample of the source side of the first rule. (See
Figure VIII-9.)
We could use either rule to perform the same mapping function in
most any CO system. It is true that the first rule is potentially
stronger than the second. A near-perfect match of s1.p1 carries
about 2N σ bits of information (see “Bit Content of Proximity” in
Table III-1 of Chapter III), while a near-perfect match of s2.p2
carries about N σ bits of information. But if N is “big enough”—at
least 20 and preferably 50 or 100—then either rule should work
satisfactorily for most purposes.
The sampling principle also applies to sampled target spaces. If a
space is sampled in either the source or the target, or both, we call
the result a sampled rule.
Why are sampled rules important? Because the principle of sampled
rules means that CO systems will probably continue to operate
correctly even with partial hardware failures. Suppose that we are
running the first rule above, and some of the cells of the underlying
hardware fail so that only the random subspace s3 is left. This might
happen, for example, if the cells of s1 were allocated to 2N different
physical computers, perhaps across the internet, and N of those
machines became unavailable for some reason. The rule will
continue to perform its function but with reduced information
Chapter VIII Architecture 111
content. It will not fail, even in the presence of massive hardware
failure. Careful design of the CO system is still needed to obtain the
full benefit of this fail-soft advantage, but the sampling principle, an
inherent characteristic of CO technology, makes fail-soft a viable
possibility.
Figure VIII-10 The concept of superposition allows correlithm objects to coexist in the same space. This is illustrated here by having three geometrical
objects co-exist in the same three dimensional space. Just as the three shapes
can easily be discerned, so correlithm objects can continue to function
correctly while in superposition. In both cases, the objects have reduced
information content, because the other objects in the space are “noise” with
respect to any object. But enough information content remains to allow each
object to retain its own identity.
Superposition
COs can be superposed. A single state point can be built from
multiple COs in one space in such a way that the COs co-exist in the
state point and can be recovered and even used simultaneously. This
112 Correlithm Object Technology
means that multiple, independent rules can be defined in the same
spaces and still run correctly.11
As a simple (and flawed) example of superposed COs, imagine the
images of a cube, a cone, and a cylinder all trying to occupy the
same space. (See Figure VIII-10.) It is possible to see all three
objects distinctly, even though they share the pixels of the image.
Consider a space, s1, of N dimensions. Suppose we define two
random COs in s1, namely s1.p1 and s1.p2. Their distance apart is
about standard distance, or N 6 . Suppose we build a state point,
s1.p, that is the simple average of s1.p1 and s1.p2, by adding the
values in each dimension and dividing by two. It is easy to show that
the distance from s1.p to either s1.p1 or s1.p2 is about
1 2 * N 6 or about 0.707 times standard distance for N
dimensions. It is even simpler expressed as bits. A near perfect
match of either pattern point is worth about N σ bits, where
σ ≅ 7 120 , the standard deviation. The match of either pattern
point with s1.p is worth about 1 2* N σ bits. In general, building
a superposed state point by averaging K random COs will make
each match of one of the pattern points with the state point worth
about 1/K of the bits it would be worth in the absence of
superposition. As usual, if N is “large enough,” the probability that a
random state point will inadvertently match well with a given
pattern point can be kept small enough to be irrelevant. (This
approximation should be used with care.)

11 This superposition property is available in any CO space, not just the real unit
N-cubes that we consider in this book. Of particular interest is superposition in
Hilbert spaces (coordinate systems comprised of complex numbers), where it has
interesting implications for quantum systems. Viewed another way, the cells of
the CO computing paradigm can be of any particular numeric type, including
binary, integer, real, complex and even more exotic forms. All such systems will
exhibit the superposition property. In fact, although the details will vary
somewhat, all of the properties of the CO computing paradigm exist regardless of
the numeric type of the cells or coordinates.
Chapter VIII Architecture 113
Consider these two rules:
s1.p1 >: s2.p3
s1.p2 >: s2.p4
Both rules map a point in the same source space, s1, to a point in the
same target space, s2. The analysis above suggests that both rules
will carry a maximum of half the bits each would carry in the
absence of the other. Thus, both rules can share the two spaces and
operate reliably if the number of dimensions in each space is
sufficiently large.
This result has powerful implications. If N for each space is kept
“large enough,” spaces can be allocated for rules and mapped into
hardware with little concern for how dimensions are shared. Spaces
are normally allocated at random from a large pool of cells, and
overlap between allocated spaces is usually a rare thing. In most
cases, the superposition property means that overlap of spaces can
simply be ignored.
In some cases, it is desirable to deliberately overlay many rules on
the same space. An example would be frequency division multiple
access from the telecom industry, with each frequency
corresponding to one dimension of the space. Here, the principle of
superposed COs and rules allows large numbers of channels and
tokens to be employed.
Statistical “Holograms”
The sampling and superposition principles of CO systems derive
from their statistical nature and especially from the fact that cells are
independent. Functioning as a target, each cell effectively “watches”
a set of source cells and compares the state CO in those source cells
to known source pattern COs. This is very similar to what happens
in the photographic plate that supports a hologram.
Technically, a “hologram” is the three dimensional image formed by
the process of holography. A “holograph” is the term often applied
114 Correlithm Object Technology
to the photographic plate that carries the interference pattern that
defines the hologram.
A holograph is made by “freezing light.” (See Figure VIII-11.) A
real object emits light that travels to the holograph. Each grain of
emulsion on the holograph captures a unique “point of view” of the
real object by capturing certain information contained in the
particular light that arrives at the grain. Different grains capture
different points of view, because no two grains occupy the same
position on the holograph. The grain uses only one dimension to
capture the light’s information, namely the degree of darkening of
the grain. Grains range from fully transparent to fully opaque. This
range can be normalized to a real value bounded by zero and one.
Under the right circumstances, each grain can reconstruct the
information it captured from the light and send essentially identical
light on its way. This is why making a holograph is often called
“freezing light.” Increasing the number of grains that are used in the
holograph increases the “resolution” of the 3D image.

Figure VIII-11 A holograph “freezes” light. Under the right conditions
(left), light from the object is captured on film. In a sense, the film “freezes”
in place the wave front of light. Later, the same wave front of light can be
“sent on its way.” An imaging device such as the eye will then form an image
from that light as though it were never interrupted. The object that is seen is
called a “hologram.”
A CO system has remarkably similar properties to a holograph. Each
target cell in a rule is a unique “point of view” about the match
between the source state point and the source pattern point. To the
degree that the source state point matches the source pattern point,
Chapter VIII Architecture 115
the rule causes the target state point to match the target pattern point.
Increasing the number of dimensions in the spaces of the rules
increases the “resolution” (or robustness or noise immunity) of the
processes that the rules implement.
Suppose we build a set of rules that implements a current digital
computer. We can do this simply by building logic gates and flipflops as described in Chapter VI and assembling them according to
some particular digital computer circuit design. We can visualize
this as a plane of the physical cells of our CO system, with the
virtual digital computer hovering over them like a hologram. See
Figure VIII-12.
Figure VIII-12 A straddler can implement a virtual digital computer across
its cells. The virtual computer can run programs just like a real one could.
We can operate this virtual digital computer almost exactly as if it
were a real one. We can run programs in the virtual memory that
access the virtual disks. If we copy the hardware of an existing
116 Correlithm Object Technology
digital computer exactly, we can even install standard software such
as operating systems, accounting programs, or anything else.
Where exactly is the CPU or a particular memory location or a disk
drive in the virtual digital computer, or for that matter the virtual
computer as a whole? In a physical implementation of the digital
computer, we can point to each of these. In the virtual digital
computer, components—even small ones such as flip-flops or
gates—are physically dispersed across the CO hardware that is
hosting the cells. Some subspace of the space of all cells hosts
individual parts such as flip-flops, but even a single logic gate will
be comprised of at least scores of cells. And since these cells are
typically selected at random, they are most likely dispersed across
the entire CO system. Larger virtual components are assembled
from smaller ones and necessarily involve larger sets of cells. The
largest component, the entire virtual digital computer itself, is
dispersed throughout all of the cells so that in truth it is “nowhere
and everywhere” in the concurrent resource.
What effect would the loss of a single cell have on the operation of
the virtual digital computer? It would have essentially no effect at
all. The cell is probably participating in many rules, each of which
has many other cells—and probably not the same cells—
contributing to its operation. In fact, the loss of a significant
percentage of all of the cells in the CO system would probably not
result in the failure of the virtual digital computer. That machine
would fail only if random chance dropped the spaces of one or more
rules below the reliable level. In fact, it is possible to quantify the
probability of that happening and design the CO system to make that
probability as small as we want.
This description suggests why it is so hard to map the functionality
of the human brain. Large, generic regions of functionality can be
identified, such as the speech centers or the vision centers. But
perhaps these are identifiable only because their functionality
involves so many cells. If CO-style rules are really responsible for
information processing in the human brain, then brain functionality
is an emergent statistical property of cell ensembles. The “mind” is a
Chapter VIII Architecture 117
virtual object dispersed across cell ensembles very much like the
virtual digital computer above. The cells of such ensembles do not
necessarily need to be especially numerous or physically very close
together. It is also highly unlikely that any two cells perform exactly
the same function.
Figure VIII-13 A correlithm object system that is running on a concurrent
resource can be very robust. Imagine a single CO “mind” running in cells
that are spread across a swarm of vehicles. The swarm can sustain
substantial damage without significant loss of functionality in the “mind” it
hosts.
118 Correlithm Object Technology
Straddlers
The characteristics discussed above and throughout this chapter
make it very attractive to host CO systems on concurrent resources.
A straddler (previously defined as a CO system that is running on a
concurrent resource) would be very valuable in any situation where
computing resources must not fail. The fact that this behavior can be
obtained for virtual implementations of existing hardware and
software is a particular bonus. But the primary reason for building
CO systems is to obtain the benefits of CO system operation, not
just hosting, and these will be discussed in Chapter X.
A straddler of particular interest is a swarm, named after a swarm of
insects. (See Figure VIII-13.) Suppose we build tiny land, sea or air
vehicles that each contains the ability to host a reasonable number of
CO cells. We could define rules within the cells of each vehicle to
control its basic operation. But if we supply each vehicle with
simple, relatively low-bandwidth communications that allow it to
broadcast its cell values and to monitor cell values broadcast by
other vehicles, then we can build rules across multiple vehicles. And
those rules can carry a swarm mind that can orchestrate the entire
group of vehicles. We might choose to superpose these high-level
rules maximally by making their spaces encompass all of the cells in
all of the vehicles. Then, the high-level rules—which presumably
will code the objectives and behaviors of the entire group—will be
essentially invulnerable to loss of individual vehicles, because there
would be no single vulnerable point. No reconfiguration of
command hierarchy would ever be necessary, because all of the
hierarchy more general than a single vehicle would be virtualized
across the entire group. Loss of vehicles would simply mean loss of
resolution, not loss of functionality. Whatever group of vehicles
remained would simply continue the high-level behavior.
Correlithm Object Technology
119
Chapter IX Converters
Moving data into and out of correlithm object space
requires converters. Soft tokens or points in highdimensional spaces represent all data within a CO
system. Data outside of a CO system, or “world”
data, can take many forms. World data can be
numbers or words or pictures or literally anything. A
converter translates between world data and soft
tokens. The converter is called a sensor if it
translates from world data to soft tokens and an actor
if it translates from soft tokens to world data.
Although an endless number of different converters
can be defined, most of them draw their behavior
from just a few categories. This enables us to create
“generic” converters that can quickly be adapted to
any world data, greatly simplifying this entire
translation problem.
The rules that we have seen so far have dealt exclusively with the
mapping of points to points—COs to COs—in high dimensional
spaces. We have argued that all data can be represented as such
points. But to build practical CO systems, we need ways to move
data into and out of CO space. This is done with a converter. A
converter that moves data into CO space is called a sensor, and one
that moves data out of CO space is called an actor12. (See Figure IX1.)
There would appear to be a need for endless types of converters to
deal with all possible data. It turns out that a few simple types of
converters will handle a remarkably large number of requirements.
Here we will define three broad categories of converters, cardinal

12 Some might prefer the term actuator to actor, but actuator normally implies
that mechanical motion results. We have chosen the term actor, because it carries
the more general connotation of doer.
120…Correlithm Object Technology
converters, continuous converters, and ordinal converters. These are
useful in various dimensionalities and in two forms, open and ring.
In most cases, converters are defined so that they can be used as
either sensors or actors, depending upon the desired direction of
conversion.
Figure IX-1 All data representation within a CO system is in the form of
COs. Sensors convert world data into COs, and actors convert COs into
world data.
Cardinal Converters
Without unduly getting into mathematical issues, we can define a
cardinal set as a set of objects with no relationship other than set
membership. In particular, there is no order associated with a
cardinal set.
An important example of a (nearly) cardinal set, for our purposes, is
a set of random COs, all defined in the same space. We know that
some of these COs will be closer together than others, but it is the
fact that they are all essentially the same distance apart that makes
them so useful in CO theory.
A cardinal converter is a set of rules that maps a set of cardinal
objects one-to-one onto a set of same-space COs. (See Figure IX-2.)

World CO Space World
COs
COs
Sounds
Images Images
Sounds
Positions Positions
Sensors Actors
Chapter IX Converters 121
Figure IX-2 A cardinal converter maps a set of unordered objects from the
world outside of the CO system to a set of random COs within it.
For example, consider a cardinal converter to deal with the logical
values, True and False. The sensor portion would have this
functionality:
True >: s.T
False >: s.F
These rules state that if the data, “True,” arrives by some means
from the world outside of this CO system, then a random CO, s.T,
will be generated in the target cells of space s. If the data, “False,”
arrives, then s.F will be generated.
We are deliberately being somewhat vague about how these two
data objects, True and False, actually arrive. In truth, such details
are irrelevant to this discussion, as is the exact syntax and certain
122…Correlithm Object Technology
other details. The concepts are most important in understanding data
movement.
The presence of either “True” or “False” as input to this sensor is
considered to be an exact match of the rule. The number of bits this
match is worth in a real CO system is one of those details that does
not matter much here. Suffice it to say that there are means to make
such specifications.
Similarly, we have the following actor definition:
s.T >: True
s.F >: False
These rules say that if the state CO in space s matches s.T, then the
data, “True,” will be sent to the world outside, and if it matches s.F,
then the data, “False,” will be sent. But matching a CO is usually an
approximate business. How close must the match be for one of these
data to be sent? The answer is that both are always sent, but the
strengths of the matches go with them. It is up to the outside world
to decide what threshold to use. This is consistent with the way in
which internal CO rules are evaluated. A rule “nominates” a target
CO and also sends a measure of the strength of its match.
Notice that this cardinal converter maps external data elements onto
the same space, s. This is standard practice for a cardinal converter.
No matter how many data elements there are, they are all cardinal
set members and should compete in the same space, where COs are
also cardinal.
Continuous Converters
A continuous converter is one that maps a continuous variable to a
continuous variable.
Chapter IX Converters 123
The name is perhaps a bit misleading. As of this writing, there are
no truly continuous converters available.13 What we actually use
are rules that sample continuous functions and employ various
schemes to interpolate.
World CO System
0.0
0.4
0.5
1.0
Figure IX-3 This continuous sensor maps the unit line segment into a CO
system by mapping three world points, 0.0, 0.5 and 1.0 to the string CO.
Intermediate points, such as 0.4 shown, are then mapped automatically to
interpolated CO positions.
Suppose the data we want to interface to the CO system is a
floating-point variable in some bounded range, such as zero to one.
What we do, in effect, is map the unit line segment between zero
and one linearly onto a one-dimensional string CO. Then as a
sensor, the converter would accept the value 0.4 (for example) and
produce a state point in the target cells from the position on the
string CO that is four-tenths of the way along the string CO from the
“zero end” to the “one end.” (See Figure IX-3.)
The state point produced will not be “near” the string CO, but
exactly on it. The input to this sensor is one-dimensional, and one
dimension is what the string CO represents, so there can be no

13 This is because all CO systems today are built using digital hosts. However,
when and if analog CO host hardware becomes available, this situation could
change.
124…Correlithm Object Technology
approximate position, and the state point could not be anywhere
else.
As an actor, this continuous converter behaves a bit differently. It is
just as unlikely that a state point will exactly match any point on the
string CO as it is that a state point will exactly match a random CO.
State points that are generated by CO systems are generally
somewhat “noisy.” For all practical purposes, an exact match will
never be generated. It is not impossible, just extraordinarily
unlikely.
This means that as an actor a continuous converter, like a cardinal
converter, must provide the “strength” of whatever output it gives.
To build its output, the actor finds the point on the string CO that is
closest to the current state point and provides the corresponding
point on the data line. The strength of that result is then a measure of
the proximity of the closest point on the string CO. (See Figure IX4.)
Normally, this kind of a continuous linear converter is all that is
needed for a wide range of applications in CO systems. Most of the
time, we are simply interested in getting a continuous data value into
and out of the CO system. But it is certainly possible to provide
mappings other than linear. Or, we could simply use the continuous
linear converter and deal with any required non-linearity internal to
the CO system, by means such as string COs.
Chapter IX Converters 125
CO System World
0.0
0.4, strength=0.9
0.5
1.0
State CO
Closest
Figure IX-4 This continuous sensor maps a string CO to a world unit line.
The state CO will normally lie off the exact line between string CO elements.
The closest point on the string CO is chosen and mapped to the world,
together with a strength that reflects how close the state point actually was.
Ordinal Converters
An ordinal converter is something of a cross between a cardinal
converter and a continuous converter. An ordinal set is a cardinal set
of distinct set members with the additional requirement that there is
an order to the set members. The alphabet is an example of an
ordinal set.
To build an ordinal converter, we build one rule for each ordinal set
member, just as we would for a cardinal converter. But we map the
ordinal set members not to random COs, as we would in a cardinal
converter, but in evenly spaced order along the string CO of a
continuous converter. (See Figure IX-5.)
126…Correlithm Object Technology
World String CO
a
z
y
x
n
m
c
b
…
…
Figure IX-5 This sensor maps the alphabet, an ordinal set, onto a string CO.
As a sensor, the ordinal converter accepts as data an ordinal set
member from the world. The corresponding rule matches strongly,
and the target state CO takes the value of the corresponding string
CO point. But depending on how we placed the mapping points
along the string CO, nearby string CO rules will also match, with the
strength of the match dropping with ordinal distance. (See Figure
IX-6.)
Figure IX-6 Recall this image from Chapter IV, Figure IV-9. The points in
the plane illustrate the sequential relationship of the elements of a string CO.
Height represents distance in CO space from the reference CO, shown in
white. The same type of distance relationships applies to any of the string CO
elements.
Chapter IX Converters 127
This means that points nearby on the string CO will also influence
the target state CO, but less strongly. Thus, ordinality is represented
in a CO system as superposed state COs with strengths that diminish
with ordinal distance.
As an actor, the ordinal converter accepts a source state CO and
produces the strengths of the matches with every point on the string
CO that is paired by a rule with a data ordinal value. These strengths
are then provided to the world for all of the ordinal values. World
programs decide how to use the information.
Higher Dimensional Converters
Higher dimensionality only makes sense for continuous and ordinal
converters. The data elements in a cardinal converter are discrete,
unordered objects. Placing them in a one-dimensional space, let
alone a higher dimensional space, imposes an order on them. On the
other hand, dimensionality makes good sense for continuous
converters.
In one dimension, a continuous converter maps a data line segment
to a one-dimensional string CO. A two-dimensional continuous
converter maps a planar segment to a two-dimensional string CO,
and so forth for as many dimensions as one likes. We place rules at
selected points throughout to sample and define the mapping. (See
Figure IX-7.)
We define an ordinal converter similarly, as a sampling of the
mapping of some continuous world object, such as a line segment or
planar segment onto a corresponding (2D) string CO. We can define
ordinal converters in as many world data dimensions as required.
Continuous and ordinal converters are not limited to regular
geometric figures such as line segments or planar segments. The
world data geometric basis for a continuous converter can be pretty
much anything that one can imagine, including curved lines,
deformed surfaces, and irregular solids. But there is an interesting
issue discussed in the next section
128…Correlithm Object Technology
2D World String CO
Figure IX-7 Here a two-dimensional world region is mapped into a CO
system. In this case, we map the four black points in the 2D world to the
appropriate four members of the 2D string CO. The distances between points
in the 2D world are reflected in the distances between CO points. The gray
point in the 2D world maps to a point whose distances are proportionate in
the string CO. It is important to understand that all points in the string CO
are at standard distance from any randomly selected point in the same space
as the string CO.
Converter Form
Let us go back to the simple continuous converter introduced above
(see Figure IX-3) that linearly maps a line segment between zero
and one onto a one-dimensional string CO. What if we want to make
a “ring” out of this line segment? In other words, what if we want
the point zero on the line to be right next to the point one? A onedimensional string CO does not have that property. Its endpoints are
most likely at standard distance from each other, depending on how
narrow its “notch” is.
The solution, of course, is to use a ring CO, (see Figure IX-8)
mentioned briefly at the very end of Chapter VII. Just as it is
possible to join the endpoints of a line segment to form a ring, it is
possible to join the endpoints of a string CO to form a ring CO.
Chapter IX Converters 129
0.0
0.2
0.4
1.0
World String CO
0.75 0.6
0.8
b
a

1.0/0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.75
0.8
World Ring CO
b/a
Figure IX-8 On the left is a continuous converter that maps the real number
line from zero to one onto a string CO, first shown in Figure IX-3. The string
CO element labeled “a” is probably at standard distance from the string CO
element labeled “b.” But we can make “a” and “b” be the same string CO
element, as shown on the right, by using a ring CO.
CO
System
Figure IX-9 Converters can map any geometrical relationship into or out of
a CO system. This includes familiar shapes such as the sphere and torus. It
also includes more exotic shapes such as the Möbius strip and the Klein
bottle. Sometimes it is important to maintain and manipulate geometrical
relationships entirely within a CO system. This, too, can be done with string
COs.
130…Correlithm Object Technology
Any geometrical object can be mapped into CO space. The only
requirement is that the CO space be of suitably higher
dimensionality than the object. The mapping, of course, can get very
complex, but it is always possible. This includes both finite and
infinite objects, fractal objects, objects from alternative geometries
(such as Riemann space and Lobachevsky space), and so forth. (See
Figure IX-9.)
This same solution approach will handle the general problem of
form, which refers to whether or not the endpoints are joined. If we
join the endpoints of a line segment, we call the line segment a ring.
If we do not join them, we call it an open line segment. Join one pair
of opposite edges in a rectangle and the result is a tube 14. Also join
the other pair of opposite edges, or equivalently, join the ends of the
tube, and you get a torus.

14 The joined edge can, of course, be twisted before joining. For example in a
positive unit cube, we could “roll the y-axis” by joining (0,0) to (0,1), (1,0) to
(1,1) and correspondingly in between to form a tube. We could also “twist and roll
the y-axis” by joining (0,0) to (1,1), (1,0) to (0,1) and correspondingly in between
to form a Möbius strip. Although we will not discuss such forms in detail here,
they present no significant problems. If the topology can be defined, it can be
mapped onto a suitable CO space.
Correlithm Object Technology
131
Chapter X Mechanisms of
Behavior
A dog and a laptop computer both process
information, but they are good at very different
things. It’s tough to teach a laptop computer to fetch
sticks, and few dogs can balance a checkbook. They
differ in how they interact with the world, but they
differ even more fundamentally in the kinds of
processing they do. These differences are well known.
The value of animal intelligence has been so well
recognized over the years that a great many projects
have tried to put some level of animal behavior into
automated processing, mostly with disappointing
results.
Correlithm object (CO) systems and animals have
many behaviors in common. But these behaviors are
not “put into” CO systems. They “fall out.” When a
computing system is built from CO “soft tokens,”
these behaviors are simply present. Perhaps this is a
coincidence. Perhaps it happens because the CO soft
token was discovered while modeling neurons.
Whatever the reason, the fact remains that CO
systems “see and do things like things previously
seen and done,” just like animals.
The implications are vast. You will find an
application for a CO system in any situation where a
human—or even an animal or an insect—currently
outperforms a computer. The obvious application
area is robotics, but this is as naïve as “ray guns,”
the initial “obvious” application area for lasers.
Today, lasers play music, clean teeth, survey land,
and carry phone calls, to name only a few
132 Correlithm Object Technology
applications. Imagine a world where every watch,
key chain, phone, kitchen appliance, and automobile
is as smart as a hunting dog, your computer behaves
more like a friend than a machine, and “supersmart” CO systems help push back the frontiers of
knowledge.
We already understand many of the mechanisms of
behavior in CO systems well enough to make these
kinds of forecasts with confidence. This chapter
discusses them in some detail.
In Chapter VIII, we discussed some of the properties and
capabilities of the CO machine architecture. Here we focus on the
CO processing itself, the programming that one does with rules to
build a CO system that runs on a CO machine.
.
Synthorg
CO
System
Antennas
Eyes
Wings
Legs
Figure X-1 A synthorg® has sensors, actors and an internal CO system that
functions as its “brain.” The antennas and eyes function as this synthorg’s
sensors, and the wings and legs are its actors.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 133
The technology of correlithm objects provides a unique and
powerful computing paradigm with information processing
characteristics more akin to those of living systems than traditional
digital computers. Just as a current digital computer program must
have means for input and output of data, a CO system must as well.
Typically, to achieve this, a CO system is packaged as an object that
we call a synthetic organism or synthorg®. A synthorg will consist
of sensors, actors and an internal CO system that can be thought of
as a brain. Through its sensor and actors, a synthorg will interact
with an environment in much the same way that a living creature
does. (See Figure X-1.)
The behavior of a synthorg is a term that applies hierarchically. At
the topmost level, there is behavior of the synthorg as a whole, as it
interacts with its environment. There is also behavior at every level
of the synthorg down from the topmost level, through groups of
related rules, to the individual rules themselves.
Behavior comes from mechanisms. A mechanism is a CO program,
a set of rules that runs on a CO machine or more generally, a way of
writing rules to obtain a particular behavior
Consider the following rule:
s1.p1 >: s2.p2
This rule, of course, relates point s1.p1 in space s1 to point s2.p2 in
space s2. The mechanism of this rule is the relationship and how it is
processed under the CO computing paradigm. The behavior of the
rule is what it does.
The mechanism of the rule compares the source state point in s1 to
the source pattern point, s1.p1, and uses the result to influence the
position of the target state point in s2 with reference to the target
pattern point, s2.p2.
The rule behaves such that the closer the source state point gets to
s1.p1, the closer the nominated target state point will be to s2.p2.
134 Correlithm Object Technology
In this chapter we examine a few mechanisms and their
corresponding behaviors. This is not a tutorial for building
synthorgs. Rather, it is a sampling of techniques and capabilities that
illustrate some of the things that synthorgs can do and how they
might do it in order to compare and contrast synthorgs with
traditional computers and to stimulate your thinking and
understanding.
Turing Completeness
We saw in Chapter VI that CO systems are Turing complete. The
importance of this fact is hard to overstate. It means that the CO
computing paradigm is a general-purpose computing paradigm,
capable of computing anything that can be computed.
In this sense, a CO system is no more or less powerful than a
traditional digital computer, but the two have different strengths and
weaknesses.
A digital computer excels at precision. If the task is adding 1 million
10-digit numbers, a digital computer is the correct choice. This sort
of task is a native strength of digital computers. It involves crisp,
clean, and accurate data and processes. Digital computers are good
at tasks that require perfectly following a precise sequence of steps
to get to a result. Digital computers work well with exact data.
A CO system excels at similarity. If the task is causing a robot to sit
in an unfamiliar chair, a CO system is the correct choice. This sort
of task is a native strength of CO systems. It involves judging
“chair-ness” and adapting a generic sitting behavior to the particular
chair. CO systems are good at tasks that require adaptation, seeing,
and doing things like things previously seen and done. CO systems
work well with approximate data and similar circumstances, and are
particularly useful when data contains noise. (See Figure X-2.)
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 135
00101100100101
01001001001010
00111010010100
10010011101010
10110100101000
10101101110100
00100100100011
01101001000110
11001110011001
11010011011010
“Chair”
Figure X-2 There is a sharp contrast in what traditional computers and CO
systems do well. Traditional machines are best at following procedures
exactly. CO systems are best at assessing and utilizing similarity. A
traditional machine will readily process the binary data on the left. A CO
system will readily assess the “chair-ness” of the object on the right.
Soft Tokens
A digital computer represents all data with hard tokens. A token in a
digital computer is “hard” because it either represents a particular
piece of data, or it does not. Such a token has “sharp edges.” It does
not have intermediate degrees of representation in the system.
A CO system represents all data with soft tokens. A token in a CO
system is “soft” because it can represent a particular piece of data in
a continuous range from “fully represented” to “not represented.”
Such a token has “soft edges.” The soft tokens are COs, and every
CO has an influence zone surrounding it. The closer that a state point
comes to a given CO, the more important that CO becomes and the
more strongly it represents its data. (See Figure X-3.)
136 Correlithm Object Technology
Within a space, soft tokens have equal stature15. They form a set of
independent objects with no intrinsic ordering.
Hard Token Soft Token
Figure X-3 Traditional or “hard” tokens have sharp, well-defined
boundaries. The soft tokens of correlithm object technology have no actual
boundaries as such. They have “regions of influence” that vary in strength
much like gravitational or electromagnetic fields, or quantum wave
functions.
The number of soft tokens available in a given space is very large.
The exact number varies depending on how important it is to avoid
matching the wrong soft token by chance. If such an error must be
an event that is at least six standard deviations from the mean
(which is, incidentally, the “gold standard” for quality in
manufacturing), then a 50-dimensional space will provide about 10
million usable soft tokens, and a 100-dimensional space will provide
about 1017. Turning the calculation around, suppose we only need 1
million soft tokens in a 100-dimensional space. Then randomly
matching the wrong token is an event more than 11 standard
deviations from the mean!

15 String COs, of course, are composed of COs that do not have equal stature.
These form soft string tokens.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 137
Huge
Number
Equal
Stature
Soft
Nature
CO
System
Token Properties
Figure X-4 The tokens that we use to represent data in CO systems have
three important properties. They all have a “soft” nature, they are all equal
in stature, and a huge number of them are available. These are inherent
properties of the underlying mathematics. They were not “engineered” into
CO systems.
It is important to understand that these are intrinsic properties of CO
systems. The “soft” nature and the “equal stature” nature of soft
tokens, and the huge number of soft tokens that are available in a
given space were not “designed into” CO systems. These properties
simply exist as characteristics of our CO paradigm. They rank as the
most important mechanisms of behavior in CO systems. If they did
not exist, we would probably not be studying CO systems. (See
Figure X-4.)
Robustness
Rules built with soft tokens are inherently error correcting and
robust in the presence of noise. The error detection and correction
codes that are traditionally used in computer science are algorithms
for selecting uniformly sparse points in high dimensional spaces
such as N-bit binary spaces. The sparseness of these algorithmically
selected points means that small errors will (probably) create a point
that is none of the selected points but closer to one selected point
than any other. The created point is most likely to be a corrupted
138 Correlithm Object Technology
version of the nearest selected point than any other selected point.
The point can be flagged as an error or “corrected” to be the value of
the nearest point. This is standard error detection and correction
practice.
But we can get the same or even better behavior from randomly
selected points in a high-dimensional space. Such points tend
strongly to be sparse and uniformly spaced. If a state point appears
in the vicinity of one of these points, the most likely explanation is
that both points in fact represent the same thing, and the difference
in position comes from noise. We can use this likelihood to perform
error detection or correction in the same way that it is done in
traditional systems. (See Figure X-5.)
A
C
B
Figure X-5 In a high-dimensional space, it is almost certain that any three
random points will all be about the same distance apart. If we find two points
close together, they are unlikely to be random. Probably they are close
because some underlying deterministic process picked them, and their small
distance is due to noise in the process. Here, points A and B were probably
picked by unrelated processes, while A and C probably resulted from the
same process plus a little noise.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 139
We can also retain the noise to retain the confidence in the data.
Consider this rule:
s.p >: t.q
A state point in space s that is near pattern point s.p will nominate a
state point in space t that is similarly near pattern point t.q. In other
words, a noisy version of s.p will produce a version of t.q with
similar noise. This may sound like a nonsensical thing to do, but it is
actually quite useful. The variation in the position of the space s
state point with respect to s.p may in fact be capturing a real
variability in the underlying pattern. Suppose s.p in the rule above
represents the distant face of someone we know, and suppose there
are other known faces represented by other pattern points in s. If the
state point in s is closest to s.p, we know whose face we are
probably seeing, while the distance itself tells us how sure we are
about the identification. When we use the rule to produce a state
point in space t similarly near t.q, we preserve both the
identification and the confidence level. It may well be important for
subsequent actions to know how sure we are that we are seeing this
particular friend. If instead we “correct” the space t state point to be
exactly t.q, the identification information remains, but the
confidence information is irretrievably lost.
Superposition
The superposition mechanism of CO systems means that the state
point in a space can simultaneously represent two or more things. A
state point can be significantly near two or more pattern points in the
same space. Consider space s with the k pattern points s.p1 through
s.pk. There are regions in space s with essentially any combination
of distance ratios to these pattern points. For example, there is a
region where points are about half of standard distance to s.p1 and
s.p2 and about standard distance to the rest. There is a region where
points are about twice as far from s.p2 as they are from s.p1, about
three times as far from s.p3 as they are from s.p1 and about standard
distance to the rest. Each region is defined by the intersection of the
appropriate “soft spheres” surrounding the pattern points. The state
point in space s can be anywhere in the space. If it is in one of these
140 Correlithm Object Technology
intersections, then that region’s distance ratios will emerge when the
state point is compared to each pattern point. (See Figure X-6.)
s.p1 s.p2
s.p3
s.state
Figure X-6 The three points, s.p1, s.p2 and s.p3, are all about the same
distance apart. The point s.state is about the same distance from s.p3, but
about half that distance from both s.p1 and s.p2. As a consequence, s.state
can represent both s.p1 and sp2 simultaneously. (The distances that we can
show in the two-dimensional drawing above can only be suggestive. The
geometry of high-dimensional spaces is quite different from that of two
dimensions.)
The state point in s can simultaneously represent essentially any
ratio of the soft tokens (pattern points) just by being in the
appropriate region of s. We call this the superposition mechanism of
CO systems because one state point simultaneously represents all of
the soft tokens in s and their weight ratios. It means that we can pick
any subset of the pattern points—one point, several points, or all of
the points—in any weight ratio and represent our selection with one
state point.
Superposition is a very powerful and useful representational
mechanism. Suppose we have a particular geometric pattern of
points arranged, for example, in the shape of the letter “A”. Next,
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 141
we map the position of each point i of the shape to its own CO, s.Ai,
in space s by defining one rule for each mapping. We use a twodimensional string CO to define location in the geometric space and
relate it to space s. If all of the geometric points of the shape
instantiate at once, the resulting state point in s will be a
superposition of all of the s.Ai. The single resulting point s.A
represents the particular geometric pattern of points. During
execution, if any of the geometric points is out of position, it will
shift the state point in s slightly, but the state point will still be
statistically very close to s.A. Even if some of the geometric points
are missing entirely, or if there are extra geometric points, the state
point will still be very close to s.A. We can thus lay out the general
shape of letters or any other outline using points in the geometric
space and expect to assign probabilities reliably between an arbitrary
set of points in the geometric space and the known geometric point
patterns. This example is suggestive of the strong data fusion
capabilities represented by the superposition property.
Strings
Essentially all of the mechanisms available with point COs are also
available with string COs. Just as a CO is a point surrounded by an
influence zone, a string CO is a path surrounded by an influence
tunnel. If we think of a string as a path swept out by moving a point,
then the tunnel around a string CO is the corresponding path swept
out by moving the influence zone that surrounds the point CO. Just
as any state point near a pattern point is probably a noisy version of
that pattern point, any state point near a string CO is probably a
noisy version of a position of that string CO. If a point CO
represents a soft token, then a string CO represents a soft sequence.
Thus CO systems inherently have powerful means to represent,
abstract, and approximate not only soft tokens, but also soft
sequences. (See Figure X-7.)
142 Correlithm Object Technology
Figure X-7 A soft string CO is a series of COs that are placed close together.
Their overlapping influence zones merge to form an influence tunnel that can
represent soft sequences.
Patterns and Functions
Essentially all mechanisms are important for both pattern
recognition and function generation. That the mechanisms are
important for pattern recognition is probably not surprising. Pattern
recognition has long been studied. We are comfortable with the
notion that we can “see patterns that are like known patterns.” The
reversed capability—generating patterns of behavior that are like
known patterns of behavior—may be less familiar. But a CO system
in fact is readily programmed with the ability to adapt a previously
learned action or skill to a current situation. We can “do things that
are like things we have done before,” but appropriate for current
circumstances.
For example, we can make small adjustments to known actions quite
easily. Adapting known actions of larger scope is simply a matter of
scale. Consider this code:
s1.pattern s2.context1 >: s3.action1
s1.pattern s2.context2 >: s3.action2
The choice of names in this rule is suggestive. If the state point in s1
is near s1.pattern and the state point in s2 is near s2.context1, then
we nominate a state point for s3 that is similarly near s3.action1.
Clearly, we will get different nominated s3 state points with the
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 143
same s1 state point depending on the “context” carried by the s2
state point. This is a trivial example of similar function generation,
but it readily generalizes to much higher levels of behavior. In
appropriately designed CO systems, we can program a small number
of representative or example behaviors and expect the CO system to
adapt these behaviors to operate correctly in a much broader “soft”
range of situations. As an illustration, a robot might be programmed
with one simple set of rules to walk over ground that is level and
even, and it would still walk acceptably over ground that is
significantly sloped or uneven. This ready ability to adapt functional
generation is another major difference between CO systems and
traditional computer systems.
Rule Pathways
Sets of rules define pathways through a CO system. For example,
consider these rules:
a.p >: b.q
b.q >: c.r
The target of the first rule is the source of the second. The pathway
is more easily seen in this rule form:
a.p >: b.q >: c.r
It should be clear that this is simply a more compact way of writing
the previous two rules. The two forms are equivalent, and the
behavior is identical. Let us add another rule pathway:
a.p >: b.q >: c.r # the previous pathway
d.s >: b.q >: e.t # the new pathway
This new pathway shares the pattern point b.q with the previous
pathway. A state point in space a near a.p will cause the nomination
of a state point in b similarly near b.q. Likewise, a state point in
space d near d.s will cause the nomination of a state point in b
similarly near b.q. But the two nominated state points in b will
almost certainly not be the same point. The two state points will be
144 Correlithm Object Technology
combined to form a single state point in b that superposes (and
carries forward) the proximity confidences in spaces a and d. When
this state point is compared to b.q, state points in spaces c and e will
be nominated similarly near c.r and e.t. In effect, processes
following both pathways will pass through b.q and continue on.
But there will be interaction between the pathways. Suppose the
state point in a is close to a.p, while the state point in d is about
standard distance from d.s. The nominated state point in b will be
close to b.q because of the state point in a. But this proximity will
cause the nominated state points in both c and e to be near c.r and
e.t respectively. The situation is actually even more complex than
this, because we could arrange to “favor” for example c.r over e.t in
this circumstance. Converging pathways can be complex, so be sure
your code does what you intend.

The preceding narrative is a bit clumsy due to the complexities of
describing the operations implied by the notation, and by now, it
should be understood how rules deal with pattern points and state
points. We will therefore adopt simpler descriptions and bear in
mind the more exact forms. For example, we will describe the rules
above as “a.p or d.s drives b.q and b.q drives c.r and e.t.”
We will also adopt another simplification. We can write these two
pathways this way:
p1 >: p2 >: p3 # where: p1=a.p, p2=b.q, p3=c.r
p4 >: p2 >: p5 # where: p4=d.s, p5=e.t
Since all five spaces are different, and there is only one point named
in each space, these substitutions are unambiguous. For example, p1
here simply means “a random point in a random space.” Similarly,
p2 means “another random point in another random space.” It is not
important to this discussion which points are in which spaces, only
that they are not the same points or spaces. When more information
is needed, we can code it the way we have been coding it prior to
now. But this convention simplifies the writing of some pathways.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 145
Grammar Systems
The rules of CO systems can be used to build the production
systems of formal grammars. The basic strategy is to use converters
to get terminals (world data) into and out of the system, use soft
tokens to code all of the non-terminals, and then code the actual
productions almost directly as CO rules. Some important and unique
things happen when this is done, which we will explore a bit below.
Our focus will be on trees.
Parse Trees
We will use the simplified notation introduced above. For example,
consider the parse tree shown in Figure X-8.
If p1 or p2 match, then p5 will be built. If p3 or p4 match, then p6
will be built. If p5 or p6 match, then p7 will be built. Readers
familiar with parse trees in computer science should be very
comfortable with this behavior. The elements p1 through p4 are
called “leaves,” p7 is called the “root” of the tree and p5 and p6 are
called “intermediate nodes.” In typical use, one of the four leaf
elements instantiates (somehow), for example p1. The presence of
p1 causes p5 to instantiate, which in turn causes p7 to instantiate.
We say that “p1 is a p5, which is a p7.” Therefore, p1 is shown to
be a member of the set that can instantiate p7.
p1 p2 p3 p4
p5 p6
p7 p1 >: p5
p2 >: p5
p3 >: p6
p4 >: p6
p5 >: p7
p6 >: p7
Figure X-8 The tree structure on the left is coded by the CO rules on the
right.
146 Correlithm Object Technology
There are, however, some important differences between the
behavior of a traditional parse tree and one built as a CO system.
The traditional system requires exact matches at each point in the
tree, while the CO system only requires like matches. In a CO
system, the state points for each new level in the tree are a
superposition of the state points in the nodes below them. Whereas
the traditional system will instantiate p7 only if there is a pathway
that matches exactly at every level from a leaf (p1..p4) to p7, a CO
system will instantiate p7 to the degree of the strongest matching
pathway from any leaf. Thus, a CO system inherently implements a
soft parse tree while a traditional system inherently implements a
hard parse tree.
Superposition and concurrency give us interesting behaviors in a
recognition tree. Although the strongest matching pathway will
dominate the state point instantiated in p7, still all of the pathways
will influence the p7 state point. Rewriting this recognition tree in
the following manner will make this clearer:
p1 >: p5 >: p7
p2 >: p5 >: p7
p3 >: p6 >: p7
p4 >: p6 >: p7
This set of rules is equivalent to the previous set, but this set
highlights the four distinct pathways that can instantiate p7. Written
either way, all four of these pathways are active concurrently in a
CO system. In a CO system, unless you deliberately code it
otherwise, all pathways from a leaf of the tree to the root of the tree
are active concurrently all of the time. There are trees of interest in
computer science (called context sensitive trees) where a traditional
system may have to search through the entire tree to find a path to
the root. A CO system inherently does this context sensitive
searching concurrently. If a path to the root exists, it will dominate
the state point in the root. This inherent ability to concurrently
search a context sensitive tree is an important advantage for CO
systems.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 147
Generation Trees
In the previous section, we described starting with the “leaves” of
the tree, namely p1, p2, p3, and p4 in the case of our example, and
proceeding to the “root” of the tree, p7. This is the “summary” or
“recognition” direction. It is also possible to start at the root and
proceed to the leaves, called the “derivation” or “generation”
direction.
We can build the generation tree shown in Figure X-9.
q4 q5 q6 q7
q2 q3
q1
q1 >: q2 >: q4
q1 >: q2 >: q5
q1 >: q3 >: q6
q1 >: q3 >: q7
Figure X-9 The generation tree on the left is coded by the CO rules on the
right.
An issue arises here immediately, as it does in all generation trees,
whether they are implemented using CO or traditional methods. If
q1 matches, then everything else will be built: q1 builds q2 and q3,
q2 builds q4 and q5, and q3 builds q6 and q7. Normally we want
exactly one of these four pathways to dominate. It appears that in a
CO system, all four will be equally strong.
First of all, the notion that all four pathways are equally strong is
only approximately true. Although q1 will pass the same match
strength to both q2 and q3, we must remember that building the
state point in each of these respective spaces is a statistical process.
It is essentially certain that one will be slightly stronger than the
other. Suppose the stronger one is q2. Then q4 and q5 will both be
148 Correlithm Object Technology
favored over q6 and q7. Since building q4 and q5 is also statistical,
one will be slightly stronger. In other words, the pathways will all
have slightly differing weights, and although all four leaves (q4..q7)
will be built, they will be built at four distinct weights. If a “winner”
needs to be chosen at this point, we can build an attractor to choose
one in several ways. For example:
q4 s.q4 >: s.q4
q5 s.q5 >: s.q5
q6 s.q6 >: s.q6
q7 s.q7 >: s.q7
Notice we are being explicit about the space s here, which has four
points in it conveniently named to reflect the corresponding tree
leaves. Whichever leaf (q1..q4) is strongest will trigger the
corresponding rule, which will “latch” in space s. There are
effectively exactly four regions of space s with s.q4 through s.q7,
each occupying the center of its region. The state point in s must be
inside one of these regions. It will match most strongly with the
pattern point for that region, and the corresponding rule will rapidly
force the state point to the pattern point. We say that the rule
“latches.” Once one of these rules latches, it will not change without
some stronger outside influence. A bit more code is required if we
want the state point in s to track the winning leaf, but that is more
detail than we need here. The point is that we can establish a clear
winner.
There is another way that a winning pathway can be decided. Let us
add two new rules to the set of four we are working with.
q1 >: q2 >: q4
q1 >: q2 >: q5
q1 >: q3 >: q6
q1 >: q3 >: q7
t.q8 >: q4 # first new rule
t.q9 >: q5 # second new rule
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 149
Again, notice that we are being explicit about space t, which has two
points, t.q8 and t.q9. Remember that these points are cardinal in t,
so if one is strong, the other is very weak. So q4 is now not only
driven by q2, but by t.q8 as well. Similarly, t.q9 drives q5. We can
think of t.q8 and t.q9 as “context rules” for the two rules where q2
is the source. We can use these context rules to “bias” which of the
q2 pathways is favored. By managing either the size of the t space
relative to the space of q2 or the strengths of t.q8 and t.q9, we can
make the q2 pathways compete on any equal or unequal basis we
like. We could do a similar thing for the q3 pathways, or for that
matter all four q1 pathways (to control q2 and q3). Thus, context
rules can give us complete control over how this generation tree
behaves.
Incidentally, these two rules:
q2 >: q4
t.q8 >: q4
are equivalent to this rule:
q2 t.q8 >: q4
if we use bits as the comparison metric. Otherwise, the set of two
rules gives a different result than the single rule. We will assume
that bits are in use unless otherwise stated.
Ladders
By now is should be clear that rule pathways can branch and
converge in essentially arbitrary ways. Certain higher level
structures, however, seem to be repeating themes. One of these is
the ladder. (See Figure X-10.)
150 Correlithm Object Technology
pr0.s in.s fg0.s >: pr0.s # r1
pr1.s pr0.s fg1.s >: pr1.s # r2
pr2.s pr1.s fg2.s >: pr2.s # r3
 pr2.s x.s >: x.s # r4
 x.s fg2.s >: fg2.s # r5
pr1.s fg2.s fg1.s >: fg1.s # r6
pr0.s fg1.s fg0.s >: fg0.s # r7
 fg0.s >: out.s # r8
pr0
pr1
pr2 fg2
fg1
fg0
in out
x
Figure X-10 The ladder mechanism provides hierarchical pattern
recognition and function generation in the through-feed paths, attractors that
function as short-term temporal memory in the feedback paths, and context
in the cross-feed paths.
We have used “s” as a point name throughout this code for
convenience, but in every case, the “s” is preceded by a named
space. Thus, fg2.s in rule r3 is the same point as fg2.s in rules r5
and r6, but that point appears nowhere else.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 151
This is only a “schematic” of a ladder. There will usually be many
more rules than this in any practical ladder mechanism. We are
illustrating a generic relationship. Here each space takes input from
up to three spaces, itself (otherwise called the feedback space), a
through-feed space, and a cross-feed space. Thus space pr1 takes
input from pr1 (feedback), pr0 (through-feed) and fg1 (cross-feed).
In a practical system, both the left, or pattern recognition path (in,
pr0, pr1, pr2 and x), and the right, or function generation path (x,
fg2, fg1, fg0 and out), of the ladder would typically be trees with x
as the root node of both. In the left path there would be rules from
many spaces that parallel space pr2 feeding into space x and each
would have many rules from many spaces feeding it, and so forth.
Similarly, on the right path space x would have many rules leading
from it that generate points in many spaces that parallel fg2, each of
which would have rules that generate points in lower level spaces,
and so forth. The cross-feed paths could connect literally anywhere
they are needed, resulting in a very complex system indeed.
The “ladder” is a general model for arbitrary behaviors in CO
systems. Information is hierarchically summarized in the pattern
recognition through-feed paths into ever more general “soft” classes
and hierarchically derived in the function generation through-feed
paths into ever more specific “soft” actions. The feedback paths
provide attractors that amount to hierarchical short-term temporal
memory, to maintain the state of what the system is seeing and
doing at the moment. The cross-feed paths provide context for both
pattern recognition and function generation.
Pathways can be even more complex than this. Potentially, each
dimension in the entire CO system can have a unique set of rules
driving it, a unique “point of view” with respect to some part of the
system as a whole. We tend to organize dimensions into spaces and
write rules to target those spaces because it simplifies our work. But
the CO computing paradigm does not require this organized
approach. Indeed, the concurrency and superposition properties of
CO systems encourage the opposite.
152 Correlithm Object Technology
The state point in the space x is the most general soft token in a CO
system. It represents a summary of the entire state of the system,
including all concurrent and superposed pattern and action classes.
Recalling from Chapter III that each dimension carries a little more
than four bits of information, even a relatively small space, x, has a
state point with considerable information content and room for
substantial numbers of concurrent rules in its feedback loop, all in
superposition.
The ladder model illustrates how simulation can take place in a CO
system. Input and output to the system can be suppressed by
maintaining appropriate attractor latch states in spaces at the level of
pr0 and fg0, on orders from higher-level spaces. The cross-feed
loops can then present superposed patterns and actions
corresponding to known input and output patterns and actions.
Higher levels can evaluate these simulated interactions as though
they were actually coming from the environment. This mechanism is
hierarchical. Cross-feed paths can establish these conditions at any
level, in fact at multiple levels concurrently thanks to superposition.
When a suitable course of action is observed at any level, it can be
pursued. We simply release the latch states and “play back” the
solution. This simulation capability allows examining options and
selecting actions in very general ways that employ the full
representational power of CO systems.
Automata
It is well known that finite automata and formal grammars have
strong equivalences. For example, a Turing machine is formally
equivalent to a Type Zero grammar. We can often benefit by
choosing to implement a particular functionality in one equivalent
form rather than the other. For Turing machines and Type Zero
grammars, it does not matter because neither are of much practical
use. In the discussion of trees above, we touched on context
sensitivity. Context sensitive grammars all have equivalent linear
bounded automata, but we are better off working with grammars, for
example as trees, rather than attempting to use the equivalent
automata. The situation is reversed for context free grammars and
linear grammars. The equivalent stack machines and state machines,
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 153
respectively, are significantly easier to work with in most cases. We
will examine simple cases of these two important behavioral classes.
State Machines
A state machine implements the notion that a system can exist in
one and only one of a number of discrete states. A state machine
accepts input that causes it either to stay in the same state or change
to a new state. It also generates an output each time it examines its
state. (See Figure X-11.)
0 1
1/0
0/0 0/1
1/0
s1 >> s2
s2.0 s1.0 >: s2.0 out(0)
s2.0 s1.1 >: s2.1 out(0)
s2.1 s1.1 >: s2.1 out(0)
s2.1 s1.0 >: s2.0 out(1)
Figure X-11 Example of a state machine that counts inputs modulo two.
On the left in Figure X-11 we have a traditional depiction of a
particular state machine. The two circles represent the two possible
states. The arrows indicate possible state transitions. The notation of
the form X/Y near each arrow means “if we are in the nearby state
and we see an input of X, generate an output of Y, and follow the
nearby state transition arrow.” Assume we start in the zero state on
the left. If the next input is zero, we emit a zero and transition to the
same zero state. If the input is one, we emit a zero and transition to
the one state. If the input is then one, we emit a zero and stay in the
one state. If the input is zero, we emit a one and transition back to
the zero state. In other words, whenever we are in state one and
receive a zero, we emit a one. Otherwise, we emit a zero no matter
what we receive.
The CO rules on the right are equivalent. We use the same
mechanism we employed in Chapter VI to implement a flip-flop,
namely two spaces of different size, notated here as “s1 >> s2.” The
154 Correlithm Object Technology
space s2 will be our latch space, and s1 will control state transitions.
The notation “out(X)” invokes an actor that will generate X to the
outside world. The rules follow the description in the previous
paragraph.
Points such as s1.0 and s1.1 are not zero and one, but CO pattern
points that represent zero and one in their respective spaces. If these
soft tokens are actually representing the numerical values of zero
and one, then the CO system implementation shown is equivalent to
a traditional state machine implementation. But suppose s1.0 and
s1.1 in fact represent “red” and “green.” If whatever input
mechanism we are using gives us exactly red or green as input, then
the behavior is the same as it is when the soft tokens represent the
numbers zero and one. What would happen if the input is “pink,” in
other words a “little bit of red”? Then we would get a state point in
s1 that is significantly close to s1.0 and essentially standard distance
from s1.1. These rules would operate “weakly, but correctly” on
such data. We would need an input of pink that is indistinguishable
from white for this system to fail. Such behavior is not available in a
traditional state machine implementation. The CO system will
continue to provide the programmed state machine behavior even if
the tokens contain substantial noise.
Stack Machines
A stack machine is a state machine plus a new device, the stack. A
stack accepts an arbitrary number of discrete tokens, one at a time,
and returns the tokens in the reverse order of receipt. We push a
token onto the top of a stack, and we pop the top token off of a
stack. Suppose we push token A onto stack S, then push token B,
then push C. The topmost token will be C. If we pop the stack, the
topmost token will be B. If we pop it again, the topmost will be A.
To code a stack machine using CO rules, we need a finite number of
stack positions and a finite number of token types that we can put on
the stack. To make the simplest possible illustration, let us choose a
two-element stack (empty plus two slots) and two tokens. See Figure
X-12.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 155
empty L1 L2
A
B B
A
push push
pop pop
in(A)
in(B)
in(A)
in(B)
out(B) out(B)
out(A) out(A)
Level 0 Level 1 Level 2
// insure s2 can control s1
s2 >> s1
// stack is empty
s1.empty s2.push in(A) >: s1.L1 L1.A
s1.empty s2.push in(B) >: s1.L1 L1.B
// stack is at level 1
s1.L1 s2.push in(A) >: s1.L2 L2.A
s1.L1 s2.push in(B) >: s1.L2 L2.B
s1.L1 s2.pop L2.A >: s1.empty out(A)
s1.L1 s2.pop L2.B >: s1.empty out(B)
// stack is at level 2
s1.L2 s2.pop L2.A >: s1.L1 out(A)
s1.L2 s2.pop L2.B >: s1.L1 out(B)
Figure X-12 Here is a simple two-level stack that can store either of two
tokens, A or B, at each level.
The current top of the stack is held in space s1, which has the pattern
points empty, L1 and L2. For each level of the stack, a separate
state machine is created to hold one of the possible stack tokens at
that level.
Assume that the stack starts in the empty state, s1.empty. When we
receive s2.push, we go to state s1.L1. Another s2.push command
takes us to state s1.L2. Subsequent push commands do nothing. If
156 Correlithm Object Technology
we receive s2.pop while in s1.L2, we go to s1.L1. If we then receive
s2.pop, we go to s1.empty.
Suppose we are in s1.empty and we receive s2.push and
simultaneously receive the soft token that represents “A” from the
sensor in(). We move to s1.L1 in the stack, and we set the space L1
point to L1.A. If we receive s2.pop now, we will move to stack
level s1.empty and simultaneously emit an “A” through actor
out(A). If instead we receive s2.push and simultaneously receive
the soft token that represents “B” from the sensor in(), then we
move to s1.L2 and set L2.B. Two consecutive s2.pop commands
would then cause the out() actor to emit B, then A, and we would
end up in s1.empty.
Generic Stack Machines
This approach could obviously be extended to deal with a stack with
any specific number of levels and tokens. But suppose we do not
want to specify beforehand the maximum number of levels that a
stack may have. Consider the following code:
s2 >> s1
s1.L[i] s2.push >: s1.L[i+1] (s1.L[i+1] s2.pop >: s1.L[i])
Look at s1.L[i]. The point L in s1 has a subscript, i. This is simply
notation. It does not matter to a CO system whether we say:
s1.a
s1.b
s1.c
or we say:
s1.L[0]
s1.L[1]
s1.L[2]
Either way, we have defined three pattern points in space s1. But in
writing down these pattern points, we can avoid picking endless
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 157
pattern point names simply by using a subscript on a single name.
We assume here that the subscript starts with zero.
Now look at this portion of the code:
s1.L[i] s2.push >: s1.L[i+1]
This instructs the CO system to move to state s1.L[i+1] if it is
currently in state s1.L[i] and also receives command s2.push. But
suppose we have not previously defined s1.L[i+1]. We simply have
the system create a pattern point called s1.L[i+1] in s1. Remember,
all randomly selected points in a space are essentially equal for our
purposes, and there are a huge number of such points available in
any suitable space. But we create s1.L[i+1] during execution, not
prior to execution as we would with s1.b in the following code:
s1.a s2.push >: s1.b
Now consider the entire line of code:
s1.L[i] s2.push >: s1.L[i+1] (s1.L[i+1] s2.pop >: s1.L[i])
The parentheses on the right end define a temporary rule. This is in
fact a short-term memory mechanism for CO systems. It works like
this. When the left-hand side of the rule, s1.L[i] s2.push, is
matched, the temporary rule is instantiated (yes, during execution)
as a new rule.16 Afterwards, we actually have the following two
rules:
s1.L[i] s2.push >: s1.L[i+1]
s1.L[i+1] s2.pop >: s1.L[i]
The two rules together form a push-pop connection between two
levels of a state machine defined in space s1. If we are in state
s1.L[i] and we receive command s2.push, then we move to state

16 The details of temporary rules are more complex than we can deal with in this
work. The simplification above captures the essence of the idea.
158 Correlithm Object Technology
s1.L[i+1]. We have added a level to the stack’s state machine. If we
are in state s1.L[i+1] and we receive command s2.pop, then we
move to state s1.L[i].
Every time the s2.push command appears, it establishes a new state
or stack level represented by a new, never-before-generated pattern
point in s1 and a new rule to use the s2.pop command to navigate
back to the previous state or stack level. Once the s2.pop command
is issued at a given level, as in the second line of code above, the
new pattern point s1.L[i+1] is abandoned. The new rule is not
deleted. It will simply never again be activated, because there are so
many random pattern points available in s1 that the same point or
even one nearby will never again be generated.17
Now that we can generate a stack with an arbitrary number of levels,
let us consider how to add an arbitrary number of tokens at each
level.
s1.L[i] s2.push >: # the source side of the rule
s1.L[i+1] S[i+1].L[i+1](state) # the target side of the rule
(s1.L[i+1] s2.pop >: s1.L[i] S[i+1].L[i+1]); # the temporary rule
Here we have added the space S code to the previous code. In the
second line, we have added:
s[i+1].L[i+1](state)
This instructs the CO system to capture the current state point in
space S[i+1] and give it the name S[i+1].L[i+1]. We could have left
(state) off, and the CO system would simply have generated a
random pattern point. We added (state) because it is frequently
necessary in a CO system to capture the current state point and
embed it in a rule. This is one way to do that.

17 In a physical implementation of a CO machine, there are often means to select
subsets of rules, deactivate or even to delete rules. Otherwise, the fact that all rules
are evaluated all of the time puts an increasing burden on the machine the longer a
stack is used. But in the abstract, a CO system does not need to delete such rules.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 159
Notice that we are selecting a random space, S[i+1], as well. We did
this just to illustrate that it can be done. It is not needed for a simple
stack. In this case, it also serves the purpose of guaranteeing that the
state point will be a random point in the space. If we just captured
the state point in the same space, it might not be random, which
might or might not be what we want. But by generating a new space
every time, the state point in that space will be random.
The third line creates a “temporary” rule that watches for s2.pop to
appear in the context of state s1.L[i+1] and when it does, the
previous state, s1.L[i], appears. The rule also nominates the state
point that we captured in S[i+1].
Thus we can build a stack of arbitrary depth that can hold an
arbitrary set of tokens. We have also shown here one way to capture
the current state point in some part of a CO system. This is
important in CO systems that can learn, because we cannot predict
ahead of time what state points a sensor might produce from
environmental data or what state points high levels of the CO system
might produce once learning begins. We remind you again that rule
sets are concurrent and superposed. A small set of rules may be
driving a large number of behaviors that co-exist at varying
strengths and levels of instantiation.
We can build an arbitrary random-access memory using these same
methods. Every time we pick a random space, we in effect
implement one “storage location.” By instantiating a state point in
the space, we “load” that storage location.
A CO system has a lot of storage capacity. The number of different
things that we can “load” into a space is the number of usable
(adequately distinguishable) points in the space, which we know is
very large even for small spaces. The number of usable spaces
available in a given CO system is also quite large. Simplistically, if
there are a total of N dimensions available in the CO system and the
average space utilizes M of those dimensions, then there are at least
N/M spaces available. But that assumes that the spaces do not
overlap. We know that superposition allows multiple processes to be
160 Correlithm Object Technology
running even in the same space, so we can overlap the spaces
extensively, and the number of available spaces is more like the
combinations of N things taken M at a time. Even for “tiny” CO
systems, this is a big number.
Expert Systems
An expert system can be more robust and generalized if they are
implemented as a CO system.
Expert systems are sometimes called rule-based systems, but the
rules in expert systems are not the same kind of rules that we have in
CO systems. An expert system is also sometimes called a decision
tree, because it asks a question and makes a decision about what
question to ask next depending on the answer. Still another term for
an expert system is an if-then-else system, referring to one way in
which the decision tree can be implemented.
Here is a simple expert system about having lunch:
If hungry then
If prefer soup then eat soup
Else eat sandwich
Expert systems have been used successfully to implement a variety
of systems. They have long been touted as a means to capture the
often-arcane knowledge of human experts in particular fields. There
are many interesting cases on record where this has been done.
Expert systems, however, all suffer from one particular difficulty.
They do not generalize well. One individual has compared an expert
system to a locomotive. It runs extremely well as long as it is on
rails, but get it even a small distance off the rails, and it is useless. In
my college days, a chemistry professor once gave my class a rule of
thumb. A student asked, “Professor, when does this rule of thumb
work?” “It works for the cases to which it applies,” he informed us,
“and it does not work for the cases to which it does not apply,” and
he turned back to his lecture. Expert systems behave in these ways.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 161
Let us code our simple expert system as a set of CO system rules.
s1 >> s2
s1.not_hungry >: s2.do_not_eat
s1.hungry >: s2.soup s2.sandwich
s2.do_not_eat >: s2.do_not_eat
s2.soup >: s2.soup
s2.sandwich >: s2.sandwich
Suppose we start off with the state point in s2 latched to
s2.do_not_eat and the state point in s1 a random point. The match
of the s1 state point with either of the s1 pattern points will not
result in a very strong nomination in s2, certainly not enough to
break the latch.
If the state point in s1 gets near enough to s1.hungry, due no doubt
to other rules that set it, then its rule nominates at equal strength two
state points in s2. The resulting s2 state point is a balanced
superposition of s2.soup and s2.sandwich. In other words, the
system is trying to pick one or the other, but it literally cannot
decide between them. The s2.do_not_eat latch contributes a
nominated state point for s2 with a weight that is some number of
bits, and this may add a slight bias that favors either s2.soup or
s2.sandwich. But this breaks the balance the same way every time.
There is actually a low level of noise in CO systems, and it becomes
important in situations such as this one. The target state point
resolution logic is usually set to inject a small amount of noise,
typically a few bits, during the process of forming a new state point
from nominations on the target side. We do this by nominating a
random state point and giving it a tiny weight. This random
nomination breaks the balance randomly by randomly placing the
resulting state point slightly closer to one or the other of the two s2
pattern points. The attractors in the last two lines do the rest. The
state point rapidly moves to the nearer of the two, and the system
decides what to have for lunch.
162 Correlithm Object Technology
This CO system will not pick the same thing for lunch every day.
What it picks depends on the slight noise that breaks the balance.
But this characteristic does not make CO-based expert systems
exceptionally interesting, because proponents of traditional expert
systems can and do employ similar random techniques.
A CO-based expert system is interesting for the same reasons that
we found trees to be interesting earlier in the chapter. A set of ifthen-else rules is a tree structure. The inherent CO system properties
of superposition and concurrency allow us to search a tree
exhaustively, without pruning anything, and to check all of the paths
at the same time. At each node of every path, the matching process
makes a gray-scale decision, not a black-and-white decision. The
result is that each overall path through the tree is optimally matched
to its available data, including any noise or imprecision, and the
final result reflects all of this partial information. If the available
data “gets off the track” somewhat, the process does not break. It
simply reduces the information content in the corresponding paths.
The result is a “best available” or “fail-soft” fit of the data to the
expert model, and a quantitative measure of how good the fit really
is.
Now let us return to our CO-based expert system example with this
perspective. No longer are we limited to the black-and-white
“hungry” or “not hungry” as inputs. We can have those inputs or
anything in between. Suppose our hunger is “moderate.” This will
be reflected as a state point in s1 that is somewhere between
s1.not_hungry and s1.hungry. That state point may or may not be
close enough to s1.hungry so that its nominated value in s2
outweighs s2.do_not_eat. Whether the system actually decides to
eat (and maybe even how much) depends on the exact position of
the state point. If it decides to eat, whether it chooses s2.soup or
s2.sandwich depends on random noise. And all of this evaluation is
happening simultaneously on all paths through the CO system.
These characteristics are intriguing even in this tiny CO system
example. In a large CO-based expert system, they become a
dominant system characteristic. From this, the reader may begin to
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 163
understand why it is that we claim that the behaviors of CO systems
are much more akin to those of living systems than those of
traditional computers.
Continuous Systems
Correlithm object technology is inherently a continuous
functionality. Because of this, it is straightforward to implement
continuous functional relationships, including differential and
integral equations and continuous feedback control systems. We
have previously seen examples of the implementation of discrete
digital components such as NAND gates and flip-flops using CO
technology. Thus, CO systems have the ability to implement either
or both continuous and discrete technology in the same system. In
the following three sections, we will begin exploring continuous
functionality in a CO system.
Why would we want to build continuous systems using CO
technology? Again, the CO computing paradigm is fundamentally
continuous. Continuous systems can directly exploit this inherent
continuous functionality as well as the robustness, concurrency, and
superposition of CO systems. We intend to build analog CO
hardware at some point. Continuous systems are the natural partner
for analog hardware. Failure to build continuous systems using CO
technology would be failure to fully utilize the CO technology.
Functional Relationships
We can build arbitrary continuous (and piecewise continuous)
functional relationships by exploiting the interpolation capabilities
inherent in rules and their execution. Consider the following code:
s1.p1 >: s2.q1
s1.p2 >: s2.q2
As usual, s1 and s2 are randomly selected spaces of suitable sizes,
each with two randomly selected pattern points defined. Suppose the
state variable, s1.state, is caused to move from s1.p1 toward s1.p2
by distance f, 0.0<=f<=1.0, which is a fraction of the standard
164 Correlithm Object Technology
distance in s1. Denote this as s1.state(f). Let distance be the
comparison metric in this case.
The state in s2, s2.state, that is nominated by s1.state(f) will be the
proportion, f, of the distance in s2 from s2.q1 to s2.q2. The first rule
will nominate s2.q1 in s2 with weight (1-f), and the second rule will
nominate s2.q2 in s2 with weight f. Recall that first moments are
used to resolve rule nominations within a space. The first moment of
these two weighted nominations in s2 is
( ) ()
( ) ( ) f f
f s q f s q
− +
− +
1
1 2. 1 2. 2
or
( ) s2.q2 − s2.q1 f + s2.q1
which is clearly a linear expression of the form m*f + b, where m is
the slope, b is the intercept and f is the independent variable. Thus,
the two rules together will map positions of s1.state along a line
between s1.p1 and s1.p2 to linearly proportional positions of state
s2.state along a line between s2.q1 and s2.q2. (See Figure X-13.)
We can also implement any non-linear relationship to arbitrary
precision. There are a variety of means available to do this. Here is
an example of one of them. Consider the following rules:
s.p1 >: t.q1
s.p2 >: t.q2
s.p3 >: t.q3
s.p4 >: t.q4
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 165
s1.p1
s2.q2 s1.p2
s2.q1
Figure X-13 Here is an example of linear interpolation. Suppose we have a
rule that maps s1.p1 to s2.q1 and a second rule that maps s1.p2 to s2.q2.
Then, state points in s1 along a line from s1.p1 to s1.p2 will map
proportionately to state points along a line from s2.q1 to s2.q2.
Suppose we pick s.p1 at random in s, then select s.p2 randomly
from the set of points that are about 10 percent of standard distance
from s.p1. We likewise select s.p3 10 percent from s.p2 and s.p4 10
percent from s.p3. These four points form a string CO. Next we
select all four of the indicated points in t at random and instantiate
the rules.
When evaluating these rules, we will use a floor mechanism. The
target nomination of any rule whose pattern point is more than a
given percentage of standard distance from s.state will receive a
zero weight. The percentage criterion is the “floor.” This will have
the effect of selecting which rules to include in target nominations.
For example, suppose s.state is about halfway between s.p2 and
s.p3. Then the distance to each will be about 5 percent of standard
distance. The distance from s.state to s.p1 or to s.p4 will probably
be less than 15 percent of standard distance, but greater than 10
percent. Suppose we select a floor of 10 percent. Then the
166 Correlithm Object Technology
nominations of s.p2 and s.p3 will receive non-zero weights—equal
weights in this case—while the nominations of s.p1 and s.p4 will
receive zero weights. Any nominations involving pattern points in s
that are further away will also receive zero weights.
This means we can use a piece-wise linear approximation for any
non-linear function. We have just shown how to isolate the line
between s.p2 and s.p3 from any other points in s by using a floor.
Our previous example showed how to do linear approximation
between two such points. Similarly, we can isolate any two adjacent
points in the string CO, for example, s.p1 and s.p2, or s.p3 and s.p4,
then do a different linear approximation for each segment. We
might, for example, extend these rules with sensors and actors as
follows:
in(0) >: s.p1 >: t.q1 >: out(0)
in(1) >: s.p2 >: t.q2 >: out(1)
in(2) >: s.p3 >: t.q3 >: out(4)
in(3) >: s.p4 >: t.q4 >: out(9)
The first pair of rules maps the interval from zero to one linearly to
the interval zero to one. The second pair of rules maps one to two
linearly to one to four, and the third pair maps two to three linearly
to four to nine. (See Figure X-14.)
Clearly, we can implement any function of one variable with this
floor technique. We can extend it easily to functions of multiple
variables by using string COs to embed a higher dimensional
function domain or range in a CO space. The local bounding point
COs of the string CO can be selected by the floor, then used for
linear approximation. Controlling the floor value in a CO system is
an advanced topic that we will touch on in the section called “IntraCO System Control” below.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 167
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0123
space s
space t
Figure X-14 String CO points in space s representing the integers 0, 1, 2,
and 3 are piecewise linearly mapped to random CO points in space t
representing the integers 0, 1, 4, and 9 respectively. Using a floor allows only
the nearest two string CO points in s to be involved. Intermediate points in s
are mapped linearly to corresponding points in t.
The quantization mechanism is another way to implement arbitrary
functions. Suppose we have the same rules as defined above,
namely:
in(0) >: s.p1 >: t.q1 >: out(0)
in(1) >: s.p2 >: t.q2 >: out(1)
in(2) >: s.p3 >: t.q3 >: out(4)
in(3) >: s.p4 >: t.q4 >: out(9)
and again, suppose that the four points in space s form a string CO
with uniform spacing of ten percent of standard distance. We will
use inverse-probability weighting, that is, each rule will use 2bits as
its weight for its nomination, where the value of bits is computed
from the distance metric as shown in Chapter III. This effectively
“compartmentalizes” space s into regions with sharp boundaries
around each pattern point.
168 Correlithm Object Technology
For example, suppose s.state moves from s.p2 to s.p3. Initially, t.q2
will have a huge weight compared to any of the other target pattern
points. In a very small interval around the halfway point between
s.p2 and s.p3, the target pattern point will switch to t.q3. Suppose
space s has 100 dimensions. If s.state is essentially at s.p2, then the
weight on the nomination t.q2 will be roughly 2414, the weights on
t.q1 and t.q3 will each be roughly 2394 and the weight on t.q4 will
be something like 2374. The first moment of the nominations with
those weights will essentially ignore all but t.q2. As s.state moves
to the halfway point, the weight on t.q2 will drop to around 2404, the
weight on t.q3 will grow to the same number, and the other two
weights will both be about 2384 or so. As s.state passes the halfway
point, the situation is symmetric to the first case, but favors t.q3.
(See Figure X-15.)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Figure X-15 The quantization mechanism has abrupt transitions between
regions. As the state point in space, s, moves along the horizontal axis, the
state point in space t “snaps” along the vertical axis from the immediate
vicinity of one pattern point to the immediate vicinity of another.
This method is probably more useful for sampling purposes than for
interpolation. It produces tightly quantized regions of space with
sharp boundaries. The quantization mechanism should appeal to
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 169
traditional hardware designers because it makes a CO system behave
much more like traditional digital hardware, where state transitions
are traversed quickly and states are driven hard into either saturation
or cutoff.
Differential Equations
The preceding section shows that we can implement arbitrary
functions as continuous CO systems. If we can show how to build a
differentiator and an integrator, then we can extend the utility of
continuous CO systems to include differential and integral
equations.
A continuous differentiator can be built by using a delay. Consider
this rule:
s.p1 >: r.p1
Suppose the rule takes a finite amount of time, ∆t, to map its input
to its output. If s.state approaches s.p1 at time t, then at time t+∆t
r.state will be near r.p1 in space r. If we write a set of rules of the
form:
s.p[] r.p[] >: v.p[]
we can map all interesting values of a variable, represented by s.p[],
and its previous value, represented by r.p[], to another variable,
represented by v.p[]. In other words, we can build y(t) = D(x(t), x(t-
∆t)) as a series of rules with (for example) floors that provide
samples across the interesting domain and range of the function and
use linear approximation in between samples. In particular, the
function, D, could be designed as a piece-wise linear approximation
to the derivative of x(t).
A continuous integrator can be built in the same fashion.
Recognizing that z(t), the integral of x(t), can be realized as z(t-∆t),
which is the integral up to x(t-∆t), plus x(t), or z(t)=I(z(t- ∆t), x(t)),
we can use rules of the form:
170 Correlithm Object Technology
s.p[] r.p[] >: r.p[]
Again, we will provide rules that sample the interesting domain and
range of the function, in this case function I. These rules comprise a
state machine that uses the current state in space r and a new state in
space s to produce the next state in space r. This gives us our desired
continuous integrator.
For the most part, we have assumed that rules execute in a discrete
fashion. We often talk about executing all of the rules during one
cycle of the CO machine. But this is merely the reflection of a need
to do things in a discrete fashion if we are to emulate a CO machine
on a current digital computer. There is no intrinsic need for cycles.
Rules can be executed continuously as continuous mappings on
suitable hardware. If this is done, then the above arguments still
hold, because no physical hardware, continuous or otherwise, can
execute a rule in zero time. There will be a non-zero time delay from
the time a state point in a source space assumes a particular value
until the image of that state point is developed in a target space. This
time delay can be the ∆t described above that facilitates the
implementation of continuous functions, differentiators, and
integrators.
Feedback Control Systems
We can build arbitrary feedback control systems using CO
technology. This follows immediately from the ability discussed
above to build continuous functions and especially differentiators
and integrators as CO systems. The various other components that
are frequently required, such as adders, multipliers, or more
complex functions such as the square root function or various
trigonometric functions can all be implemented with what has
already been demonstrated. To get any feedback control system we
want, we simply create and assemble the necessary CO components
to form still larger CO components, until we arrive at the required
system.
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 171
Artificial Neural Networks
An artificial neural network is a system that relates two spaces. In
the usual formulation, we have space A and space B and there is a
function, F(), that maps A to B, or in other words, B = F(A).
Initially, F() is unknown. We are given a set T of point pairs,
T={(ak, bk) | k=1..K} that are (possibly noisy) samples of F() such
that bk=F(ak), or at least bk≈F(ak). Two phases are defined, a
training phase and an execution phase. During the training phase,
we use the training set T to obtain an estimate, F’(), of F(). During
the execution phase we use F’() to map arbitrary points in space A
to their images in space B.
If you think that this sounds a bit like a CO system, you are right.
There are some similarities. But there are also important differences.
Both CO systems and artificial neural networks map points from one
space to another. But much of the focus in artificial neural networks
centers around how to obtain F’(). Many clever techniques have
been developed. Once F’() has been obtained, the interest shifts to
using F’() for estimation work. Sometimes the interest is focused on
certain internal details. Artificial neural networks usually have what
are called hidden layers. The size and number of these is often a
central issue. CO systems normally have nothing similar.
A CO system is not an artificial neural network. At the heart of the
difference are the correlithm object and the statistics of randomly
selected points in high-dimensional bounded spaces. Artificial
neural networks do not use the CO soft token. They take their data
as they find it. The training set T is typically generated by systems
external to the artificial neural network. That data may be
normalized or otherwise prepared, but it is not mapped to correlithm
objects before use, and the properties of correlithm objects are not
central to the operation of the system. This is a profound difference,
because it is the properties of correlithm objects and the statistics of
high-dimensional spaces that enable the CO computing paradigm. If
these properties did not exist, the paradigm would not exist either.
We could use artificial neural networks internally to implement the
mappings defined by CO system rules. In fact, in a sense, we do.
172 Correlithm Object Technology
There is a calculation in current CO machines that is a very simpleminded artificial neural network, one that is “good enough.” One big
reason not to use mainstream artificial neural networks is that most
of them take a long time to obtain F’(). The method we use is very
fast, and CO systems do not need any additional accuracy in F’()
that might be available from mainstream artificial neural networks.
We can certainly implement artificial neural networks using CO
systems. The training set, T, is a set of pairs of points. We can easily
implement these as CO rules. If we have the training point pair,
(a,b), we simply write the rule:
s1.b >: s2.a
Of course, we have to arrange for s1.b and s2.a to be actual data
points and not random points, but this is easily done. Once the rule
is written, any s1 state point that approaches s1.b will be mapped to
an s2 state point correspondingly close to s2.a. We rely here on the
“simple-minded artificial neural network” inside the CO machine to
do all the work.
Notice that implementing an artificial neural network system as a
CO system means that all of the inherent properties of CO systems
may be available, including concurrency and superposition.
However, these properties derive directly from the use of correlithm
objects and the statistics of high-dimensional spaces. Hence, we say
“may” be available. Concurrency and superposition will in fact be
present, but they may not perform as expected.
Fuzzy Logic
Fuzzy logic was developed by Dr. Lotfi Zadeh of U.C. Berkeley in
the 1960s. It is a superset of conventional logic extended to deal
with the concept of partial truth, that is, values of truth between
completely true and completely false.
Typically, the logical variables of fuzzy logic are real numbers
bounded by zero and one. Membership functions are defined that
often capture “conversational” concepts such as “small,” “medium,”
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 173
and “large.” These functions typically have a central peak that
descends toward zero as distance from the central peak increases.
Often very simple membership functions are used to minimize
computational complexity, such as a linear “inverted V” or
“triangular” membership function.
A strong appeal of fuzzy logic is its use of natural language
descriptions. It can be argued that natural language has evolved into
a highly optimized means for representing the information structures
found in human minds.
Another appealing aspect of fuzzy logic is its simplicity. Complex,
effective control systems can be described with a comparatively tiny
set of fuzzy logic variables and rules, and there is typically no need
to invoke deep mathematics. Adjustments can be made to
operational systems simply by overlaying additional variables and
rules, without needing to revisit the entire fundamental design.
There are strong parallels between the concepts of fuzzy logic and
those of CO technology. Both have the concept of fuzzy or soft
representations of data. Both use rules that map data to data. Both
use similar means to evaluate and combine rules, for example the
centroid. The membership functions of fuzzy logic and the influence
zones of point and string COs are similar in shape and purpose.
Other parallels can be drawn.
There are also sharp differences between fuzzy logic and CO
technology. The biggest one is the correlithm object itself, which
emerges from the statistics of points in high dimensional spaces.
Nothing similar exists in fuzzy logic. Another difference is that
fuzzy logic is not normally tied to a specific architecture. The
advantages of CO system architecture are consequently absent from
fuzzy logic systems. Other differences exist.
Both fuzzy logic and CO systems were developed from a desire to
better understand the workings of the human mind. It is perhaps not
surprising that there is a close relationship between the disciplines.
Each may have things to offer the other. Collaboration between
174 Correlithm Object Technology
fuzzy logic and CO systems could well be a fruitful direction for
future research.
Internal Control
At various times we have discussed the need for different modes of
operation at particular places within a CO system. For example, in
the section on Continuous Systems, we used a floor mechanism to
ensure that only particular rules provided non-zero weights to their
target cells. At different times, we have used distance, bits, and
inverse-probability as the metric for comparing state points with
pattern points. There are many instances where variations in
operation such as these are not only desirable, but also necessary.
How do we implement these operational variations? What
mechanisms do we use?
Living systems often face the same kinds of problems. There is
ample evidence, for example, that natural chemical substances are
employed by organisms to modify the behavior of their own neural
systems. Short-term memory probably has a chemical component.
Other examples could be cited, but it is clear that not every need in
living neural systems is handled directly by neural information
processing. Sometimes needs are handled indirectly.
We will take the same approach. A CO system excels at recognizing
situations and acting appropriately. Suppose a particular set of rules
needs to switch from “normal” operating mode to “floor” operating
mode. The need will necessarily have a describable situation that
triggers it. We will build a set of rules to watch the situation.
Depending on the state of the need, these rules will direct an actor.
The world-side of the actor will perform the required mode change.
(See Figure X-16.)
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 175
CO
System
Control Panel
Actor
Figure X-16 The operating characteristics of a CO system can be modified
while it is running. Here a CO system controls an actor, which operates the
control panel of the CO system itself. This could be used, for example, to
perform learning within the CO system or to modify various parameters.
It is easy to overlook the power of this mechanism because of its
simplicity. CO systems extensively employ rule-level feedback, for
example in state machines. Here, we are simply extending the
feedback concept to include the use of an actor to instruct the world
outside of the CO system to modify the nature of the CO system
itself. The same result could be achieved internally by providing
alternative sets of rules with permanently installed modes, then
invoking the right set of rules depending on the state of the need.
But it is a far simpler and more elegant solution to use an actor to
modify how one set of rules is processed.
Learning
CO systems must be able to learn. This means that CO systems must
have the ability to create their own appropriate rules. So far, we
have dealt primarily with CO systems whose rules are provided by
human programmers. In only one case, the Generic Stack Machine,
have we seen a system that adds its own rules. We must have more
176 Correlithm Object Technology
general learning mechanisms if CO systems are to achieve their full
potential.
The subject of learning mechanisms for CO systems is in its infancy.
Fortunately, there have recently been significant advances in general
learning theory that we can exploit, particularly in the field of
reinforcement learning. We expect the combination of these kinds of
advances and existing CO technology to produce important
developments. But these developments are in the future. Here, we
must be satisfied with some introductory material.
It is important to understand what learning can and cannot do. A
system can learn to make effective use of the information it gathers,
but it cannot learn to gather different kinds of information from the
world outside. Animals have eyes that see in the visible light and
near-visible light spectrums. But animals, even humans, do not see
radio waves and cannot learn to see them. We can see radio waves
indirectly by building a device such as a television set that can
convert radio waves to visible light, but no amount of learning
theory or practice will ever enable our eyes to extract a television
picture directly from radio waves because our senses cannot directly
access the relevant information. Perhaps in a few million years, we
could evolve a direct sense for radio waves, but we cannot learn it.
Similarly, no system can learn to directly affect its environment if its
actors do not directly affect the relevant environmental parameters.
For example, we humans are not equipped to fly. No amount of
learning can teach us how to move our bodies to produce flight. We
can learn to fly indirectly, by learning to build airplanes. But that
potential must exist in the environment as an extension of how we
can move our bodies.
No system can learn if the relevant information is not accessible
through the data it can receive and send. Accordingly, when we
speak of learning, we will exclude the creation of new converters.
We can, of course, provide a CO system with any new kind of
converter we like. But if a converter does not gather or produce
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 177
relevant data, no amount of pure learning will transform it into one
that does.
CO systems learn by adding rules and states. One important learning
mechanism for CO systems is therefore the unfamiliarity
mechanism. A system of CO rules “watches” for familiar situations
by observing how near state points come to pattern points. If no rule
produces a near match, then the situation should probably be
captured in a new rule. The source side of the new rule is the current
state point in the source space. The target side is the current state
point in the target space.
For example, here is what we might call a “novelty detector.”
# “novelty” detector
latch < input # this “<” is not a mapping operator
# “forever” latch
latch.otherwise >: latch.otherwise
# “novelty” assessment
latch.otherwise >: novelty.novel
input.known1 >: novelty.known
input.known2 >: novelty.known
…
input.knownK >: novelty.known
The space, latch, must be smaller than the space, input, so that any
of the known input points, input.known1..input.knownK, can be
stronger when they match than a perfectly matched latch.otherwise.
The state point in the space, latch, matches the pattern point,
latch.otherwise, perpetually. If any of the known input points are
strongly matched, then the point, novelty.known, will be
instantiated in the space, novelty. If none are strongly matched, then
latch.otherwise will instantiate novelty.novel. This type of
construct is one way to indicate when an unfamiliar input is being
received.
It is possible in principle to combine the unique example-based
processing characteristics of CO systems with any learning
178 Correlithm Object Technology
technique. Since CO systems are general-purpose programming
systems, any learning technique can be supported.
A few new rules may provide disproportionate benefits. Because of
the inherent ability of a CO system to adapt its rules to the present
situation, a small number of rules can result in significant processing
capabilities. A system may not have to learn many rules to deal with
complex situations.
Mind
Ultimately, the goal is to build systems that behave like living
systems, not like traditional computer systems. These two kinds of
systems are clearly good at different things. Traditional computer
systems are precise. Living systems are flexible. Neither works well
where the other is strong.
Can we build “minds” with CO technology? This is not a
philosophical question. We are not addressing the infamous
“Mind/Body Problem,” at least not here. This is an engineering
question. Can we use CO technology to create systems with the sort
of complex, useful behaviors found in living systems?
We believe that the answer is a resounding “Yes!” CO technology
was modeled after living neural systems and rooted in a
breakthrough understanding of the mathematics of high-level neural
ensemble behavior. CO systems inherently exhibit many of the
“right” properties. These properties were not built into the CO
model, but rather emerged from it. This is strong support for the
model. The rule pathways that we use to program CO systems have
much in common with the “thought processes” we each can observe
in our own minds. But the most compelling evidence of all is the
results. CO systems do in fact behave more like living systems than
traditional computers.
To begin building “minds,” we must first bring to bear all of
traditional computer science. We must cast it into the new CO
computing paradigm and see what results. In this chapter we have
made a few first steps in this direction, but it is already clear that
Chapter X Mechanisms of Behavior 179
there are significant benefits available and that the work has only
just begun.
The really exciting work, however, lies where computer science has
not gone before. CO technology promises compelling, satisfying,
effective solutions to important, long-standing problems such as
speech recognition and generation, vision, natural language
processing, robotic control, and data fusion, to name but a few. We
can already glimpse on the horizon truly intelligent systems
emerging from CO technology. The development of these systems is
a hierarchical process that will progress exponentially, at least for
the foreseeable future. The more intelligent a system becomes, the
faster and more capably it can bootstrap the next level of
intelligence.
In the middle Twentieth Century, the renowned science fiction
author, Isaac Asimov, wrote about intelligent robots with “positronic
pathways” in their brains. Perhaps his dream is about to be realized,
but with correlithm objects instead of “positrons.”
Correlithm Object Technology
181
Chapter XI Directions
We have argued in this book that correlithm object technology
provides many new and valuable tools for processing information.
In this chapter we will try to communicate some of our vision of the
potential for correlithm object technology.
We think that correlithm object technology will quickly lead to what
we call “The Other Computer Industry.” We see the current
computer industry being joined by one where systems behave more
like living organisms than machines. This will have profound and
far-reaching effects in literally all aspects of life. The technology of
synthetic organisms could have an impact at least as great as that of
traditional computers.
The idea of “The Other Computer Industry” is not new. Enormous
effort and resources have been poured into producing such an
industry, starting as early as the middle of the Twentieth Century.
There have been many, many projects and many failures, some quite
spectacular and expensive. True success has been rare and elusive.
Nearly every major corporation and most branches of the U.S.
Government have attempted at least some projects in artificial
intelligence or pattern recognition, with results that were often less
than satisfying.
Why CO Technology Will Succeed
Why do we believe that correlithm object technology will succeed
where so many others have failed?
We believe it because we believe we have a breakthrough in the
understanding of how living neural systems do what they do. Our
analysis of living neurons drove our work. Our results fit the facts.
A new mathematics emerged that is both simple and non-obvious. It
tells us how data is represented in living systems, how it is stored
and how it is manipulated. When we build systems that incorporate
these notions, behaviors emerge that we have only seen in living
182 Correlithm Object Technology
neural systems, behaviors that previously nobody could adequately
explain, but that we now understand clearly. This same story cannot
be told for any other competing technology.
Why CO Technology Was Not Discovered Sooner
Why has it taken so long for science to arrive at this understanding?
We think that this is because much of the behavior of living systems
emerges from the statistics of high-dimensional bounded spaces. To
observe these emergent properties, one needs the concept of the
ensemble: the notion of the state of the ensemble as a point in a
bounded, high-dimensional space; and the nature of point
distributions in such spaces. It is hard enough for anyone to deal
with high-dimensional geometry because it cannot be visualized, but
familiarity and intuition with three-dimensional geometry make it
very difficult even to believe the key concept of correlithm object
technology. Random points in a bounded, high-dimensional space
are all about the same distance apart! For most people, this idea is
wildly counter-intuitive. (But so are many ideas in other areas, such
as Relativity and Quantum Physics.)
Another aspect of the answer to this question lies in the nature of the
relevant fields.
Neurophysiologists study intimate cell details, typically at the
molecular level. Even today, the primary model of a living neuron is
an electrochemical one that describes how individual pulses appear
on a neuron’s axon. The focus is on the biochemistry of individual
pulses, not information processing. Most neurophysiologists know
that the rate of pulses on an axon forms a continuous, time-varying,
real variable. But I suggest that few currently see pulse rate as an
alternative and equivalent description of neuron output that is key to
understanding how neurons process information. There have been
attempts to analyze individual neural circuits and understand how
they work, but no compelling universal principles have emerged—
until now.
Chapter XI Directions 183
Computer scientists have primarily focused on the wrong things.
When these workers have tried to build systems that behave more
like organisms than machines, the effort has typically been to define
the interesting properties and insert them into the systems. Our
minds can visualize the properties we want. Why not just build them
in? But this has not worked well in practice. And rarely have there
been successful attempts to do the reverse, model living systems
well enough that the interesting properties of living systems emerge
from the models. Most people implicitly expect that the interesting
neural properties are local. A person trained in the hardware and
software of computer science will often view the apparently tangled
mass of living neural systems and try to discover simple, local
properties of the systems akin to familiar logic gates and flip-flops.
Information in living neural systems is much more global than local.
Reliable information emerges only when ensembles get “large
enough” to stabilize the statistics of correlithm objects. Information
is not reliable when using only one or a few neurons, any more than
holographic image reconstruction is reliable when using only one or
a few grains of emulsion.
The realm of mathematics from which correlithm objects arise is not
well studied. The concept of the correlithm object is rooted in a field
of mathematics called geometric probability. Not many
mathematicians are well versed in this field. The field itself is
currently quite abstract. Often, the only individuals who can read
available material on the subject are those with advanced
mathematical training. Many mathematicians consider geometric
probability to be “recreational” mathematics, not a serious field of
study.
Other examples could be given, but the points we have already made
are suggestive. Many fields of study seem to have characteristics
that lead workers away from the discovery of correlithm objects. We
believe that this is a significant factor that helps explain why it has
taken so long for correlithm objects to be found.
184 Correlithm Object Technology
Summary of Characteristics
Here, we list some of the key characteristics of CO systems that
distinguish them from other systems. This is not intended to be a
complete list. Such a list is currently hard to produce. Many of these
topics interrelate and overlap in complex ways. Different things
often come to light when the same ideas are viewed differently. We
have just begun to explore CO systems.
The Correlithm Object
The correlithm object is the cornerstone of CO technology. It is
absent in every other form of computing, and we believe that it is of
primary importance and a key reason why living neural systems
have such unique behaviors.
Soft Tokens
When a correlithm object represents data, it has two aspects. First, it
is a token that stands for the data. But when it is used in the CO
computing paradigm, it also inherently captures the “strength” at
which the data is represented in the system. Because correlithm
objects represent their data in varying degrees, we often refer to
them as “soft” tokens of data representation.
String COs
A string CO provides means to represent geometrical relationships.
String COs tell us how to recognize the same word spoken slowly or
fast, or how to identify the letter “A” when it is severely distorted or
obscured by noise.
Robustness
Robustness emerges from CO technology in at least two places. The
first is found in the underlying implementation that supports CO
systems, which is necessarily comprised of cells. The system will
continue to operate correctly even if a relatively large number of
these cells fail. The second robustness lies in the CO programs
themselves. Correlithm objects have a strong, inherent errorcorrecting nature that ensures that CO programs will work correctly
for correct data and degrade in a controlled, reasonable fashion as
noise in the data increases.
Chapter XI Directions 185
Sampling
The sampling property of CO systems is closely related to the
robustness property. If a correlithm object defined in N dimensions
represents some particular datum to some particular degree, then any
subset or “sample” of the correlithm object—any M of the N
dimensions, 20<M<N—will also represent the datum to the same
degree. Only the robustness of the representation diminishes.
Superposition
Two or more COs can share the same dimensions at the same time,
without losing their own identity, because there is so much natural
redundancy in COs. This superposition property has many uses,
including the ability to overlay rules on cells with minimal regard
for how the rules might interfere. There is typically no need for
careful, non-overlapping design. Superposition also supports
powerful new methods of data fusion.
Straddlers
There are normally several levels of concurrency available in a CO
system. Exploitation of this concurrency allows the CO system to be
scattered almost haphazardly among the resources of a distributed
computing system. This means, for example, that we can build a CO
system that “straddles” 10,000 internet nodes or a swarm of robot
bees. Such systems have a kind of “group mind” that is largely
impervious to failures of the component parts. Moreover,
examination of one or a few of the nodes will shed little light on
what the system as a whole is doing. The CO system exists
“nowhere and everywhere” in a straddler.
Statistical “Holograms”
Correlithm object systems have many properties in common with
holograms. A CO system is built of cells; a holographic plate is built
of grains of emulsion. The resolution of a hologram increases as
grains of emulsion increase; the resolution of a CO system increases
as cells increase. One major difference is that a hologram arises
from the interference of light, while a CO system arises from
statistically emergent properties. CO “holograms” are much easier to
make than light holograms.
186 Correlithm Object Technology
Virtual Systems
A CO system is a general-purpose computing system. We can
emulate literally any computing system—for example a desktop
computer—with a CO system. When this is done, the emulated
computer is “virtual” in the sense that it has no physical parts. But
we can still run programs on this virtual machine. Virtual machine
emulations built this way and running on a straddler are ideal in
mission-critical situations, because the virtual machine is as robust
as the straddler itself and essentially will not fail.
Continuous Systems
CO systems are inherently continuous systems, not discrete systems.
Any continuous functionality can be built as a CO system.
General Purpose Analog Computers
A CO system can be implemented on analog hardware. CO systems
are general-purpose computers. This means that we can build a
general-purpose computer out of purely analog hardware. There are
many potential advantages to such a system, including lower power
requirements, smaller device sizes, easier and perhaps less
expensive fabrication, and quite possibly superior speed.
Early Applications
Applications for CO technology abound. Find a task where a
person—even an animal or insect—does a better job today than a
computer system, and you have found a potential application. Do
not expect CO technology to be better at the task than the organism,
because organisms are pretty good at what they do. But you can
expect it to be nearly as good, and probably a great deal better at it
than almost any traditional computer system. Look for simple
things. The complex things will come later.
Enhancing Current Systems
Here are some examples of the kinds of applications we think CO
systems can handle well in the near term. Most of the major
categories of computing systems can probably be enhanced with CO
technology. Expert systems do not degrade gracefully. CO expert
systems would. Neither artificial neural networks nor fuzzy logic
Chapter XI Directions 187
systems have convenient ways to tokenize information. The
correlithm object would provide soft tokens and general-purpose
computing. Many, many examples exist, and every major computing
technology now has to be re-examined in light of what CO can add.
Cueing
Cueing systems are a significant near-term use of CO technology. A
cueing system prepares and presents data to a human expert in
probable order of relevance. Any expert working in an area where
significant amounts of irrelevant or unimportant data must be sifted
to find data of interest would benefit from a cueing system.
Data Mining
There are two primary shortcomings in data mining systems today.
Most are forced to deal with the lexical and syntactic elements of
data rather than the meaning of the data, and most do not deal well
with data that contains noise. There is strong reason to believe that
CO technology can overcome both of these issues.
Data Fusion
Animals will use all of their senses to evaluate situations. The fusion
of diverse sources of information into a single situation remains a
very difficult problem for traditional computers. Hierarchies of COs
provide natural and compelling ways to perform data fusion.
Superposition provides important new tools.
Speech
In the last two decades of the Twentieth Century we heard time and
again that “speech recognition is a solved problem.” It is not. Until a
system performs at a level comparable to a human in difficult
circumstances, no such claim will be valid. Speech recognition is
not just a signal analysis problem, but also a hierarchical problem
that involves signal analysis, syntactic and semantic elements,
context, and several other factors. However, tools such as string COs
offer the possibility for significant improvement.
188 Correlithm Object Technology
Natural Language
Many attempts have been made to create a system that can carry on
an intelligent conversation or at least accept natural language
instructions. When these work, it is usually in very limited,
unambiguous contexts. The primary problem is the absence of a
strong, usable model of “meaning.” CO systems offer several
important tools in this area.
Vision
Animals can do many things with their eyes that are difficult or
impossible to do with traditional computers. CO systems offer a
fresh approach and many new tools, including the important string
CO. We believe that major advances can happen quickly in this area.
Handwriting
A visual task of substantial importance is the reading of
handwriting. Once again, there has been a huge amount of work in
this area, but would you agree that this task has been completely
solved? We think not. CO technology offers a number of new
capabilities gleaned from the visual systems of living organisms. We
believe that important advances in handwriting recognition will be
made quickly when CO technology is applied.
Simple Robots
Why are coordinated behaviors so hard to program into even simple
robots? Fuzzy logic has provided some significant simplifications,
but it is apparently not enough. We believe that CO systems, which
inherently provide the kind of information processing found in
living organisms, will pick up where fuzzy logic leaves off.
Security
The “Holy Grail” in the security business today is “anomaly
detection.” Security systems, including surveillance cameras,
computer activity monitors, building sensors, and so forth generate
huge amounts of raw data. Almost all of this data is routine and
therefore irrelevant. It is the rare “anomalous event” that is of real
interest. Sometimes the nature of these events is known, and a
traditional computer can watch for them. But all too often, the only
Chapter XI Directions 189
thing that characterizes the event is that it is “out of the ordinary.”
Computers are not very good at detecting this kind of anomaly. But
people are, which is why people are so often used for this purpose.
CO systems are also very good at detecting things that are out of the
ordinary.
The Future
This is the first in a series of books that are planned to deal with
many aspects of correlithm object systems. This book is intended to
be a “primer” for some of the major concepts. Later books will deal
with specific areas in much more detail.
We will close this book with a short discussion of some of the things
we think the future holds for correlithm object technology. Once
again, this is by no means a complete list. It is merely the things
uppermost in our mind as this is written.
Tools
Living neural systems appear to be very complex whenever they are
examined at the level of microscopic detail. It should therefore come
as no surprise that CO systems are also very complex at their lowest
level of implementation. It is a supremely difficult task to “debug” a
CO system at that level. Every single data object of interest is in fact
a long list of random numbers. CO data objects are statistical
entities, and unless random seeds are carefully maintained, they are
never exact or reproducible. The source and target relationships
among cells are also statistical, so no “final wiring diagram” or
description is possible. And the rules that provide the functional
definition of a CO system often spread themselves statistically
across the cell relationships, further complicating the picture.
In such an environment, tools are essential. We need to deal with
CO systems at as high a level of abstraction as possible. Even at the
rule level, the large numbers of rules needed for significant systems
can be overwhelming. As much of this complexity as possible must
be automated and hidden from system developers unless they
absolutely need to know. Even then, automation must be available
or attempts to delve into the lower levels will fail.
190 Correlithm Object Technology
This work is currently in its infancy. There is much room for
development in this area. A formal high-level language for CO
systems has so far proved elusive. Extensions to existing languages
are useful, but improvement is needed. Graphical user interfaces to
aid in developing CO systems are underway, but they are not yet up
to the level that one could wish. Very little work has been done to
exploit the inherent CO concurrency.
We expect rapid, even explosive progress in the area of tools. Many
people find CO technology compelling and want to work on it. This
should strongly drive tools development.
Learning
We have not had a lot to say about learning in this book. That is
mostly because dealing with learning requires that one already
understand CO technology. But learning is an obvious and natural
direction for CO technology to take.
If tool development is important, then learning technology is critical.
There may be limits to the complexity of CO systems that humans
can build and maintain. That is certainly true in traditional computer
systems. But a CO system that can learn is limited only by its
available computing resources, the infrastructure on which it runs.
And there are simple ways that these resources can grow to support
ever-larger elaborations of a particular CO system, without ever
having to start over.
An obvious initial direction is to bring together CO technology and
existing learning technology, particularly reinforcement learning.
This could bear immediate fruit.
There are also simple learning mechanisms that are implied by the
CO technology itself. These should be explored early on.
All things considered, learning may be the single most important
direction for the future of CO technology.
Chapter XI Directions 191
Quantum Information Systems
One area of particular interest for the application of correlithm
objects is the emerging field of Quantum Information Science (QIS).
It has recently been shown18 that correlithm objects can be imposed
on and recovered from qubits and ebits. Not only do COs exist in the
quantum realm, but they survive measurement. The statistics of
bounded, high-dimensional Hilbert spaces produce different
expected values and standard deviations from those of real spaces,
but the statistics are equally well-defined and usable.
When dealing with QIS from the perspective of COs, we define
things a bit differently. We still have a bounded N-dimensional
space, but now each dimension is a complex number with real and
imaginary parts that are each bounded by one and minus one. This
puts the origin at the midpoint rather than at a corner, and doubles
the lengths of the edges of the N-cube. Now we can define each
point within the bounded space as a true vector pointing from the
origin to the point.
Quantum physics imposes an additional constraint. All of the
vectors must be of unit magnitude. Quantum physics calls this the
unitarity constraint, and all quantum systems require it. This means,
in effect, that all points of interest lie on an N-sphere (actually an Nhedron) with unit radius that is centered at the origin. This constraint
also results in reducing the dimensionality of the system from N to
N-1.
With these changes, the natural unit of measure is the radius of the
N-sphere19. With this radius set to one, as N grows the length of the
edge of the unit N-cube shrinks toward zero. The standard deviation
of the distribution of distances between random points also shrinks
toward zero, and the expected value of the distribution becomes a
constant. This is precisely the geometrical statistics we studied early

18 U.S. Air Force contract nos. F30602-02-C-0077 and F30602-03-C-0051.
19 Table II-1 in Chapter II shows a comparison of unit edge versus unit radius
statistics for the real unit N-cube. Similar numbers are obtained for QIS systems.
192 Correlithm Object Technology
in this book, but from the perspective of a unit radius rather than a
unit edge. All of the CO statistics still “work.”
An interesting and useful observation comes out of this changed
perspective. We know that all points in a bounded, high-dimensional
space tend to be about the same distance apart. When these points
are viewed as vectors, they tend to be orthogonal. So we can pick
two of these points at random, express them as vectors, multiply the
vectors (which is the “inner product” operation), and get a result that
is essentially zero every time. Not only are all points about the same
distance apart, but they are all nearly at right angles to each other as
seen through the midpoint of the space. This means that sets of
random points can be used as nearly orthogonal basis vectors, and
huge numbers of such basis vectors are available in any given Nspace. If exact orthogonality is required, only N orthogonal basis
vectors can be defined. But if “essentially exact” orthogonality is
“good enough,” which it is in many cases, then the available number
is huge. This opens a wide range of issues and opportunities in many
fields.
We expect to publish at least one book devoted exclusively to
quantum correlithm objects.
Ensembles
The ensemble is at the heart of correlithm object technology. An
ensemble in this sense is any group that can be modeled using the
concepts of correlithm object technology. In this book, we have
focused on ensembles of neurons. Each neuron has an axonal or
output pulse rate that is a real number that varies over time between
zero and one. But all that is really required to apply correlithm
object technology is an ensemble where each member independently
produces its own version of the same bounded variable. The set of
the values of this variable across the N members of the ensemble
defines a point in a bounded N-space, and correlithm object statistics
emerge.
It is obvious that these ensemble concepts apply to
neurophysiological investigations and modeling. We believe that we
Chapter XI Directions 193
have discovered the primary mechanism for the representation,
manipulation, and storage of information in neural systems, but
there is tremendous opportunity and much work still to be done.
There appear to be major opportunities in many areas, including
neurodiagnostics, neurostimulation, and prosthetics. Can these
principles be established in the lab? Will heretofore-mysterious
neural behavior become less mysterious? Will significant
applications be developed? We think so.
Psychologists may benefit at a much more macroscopic level. CO
technology provides a new tool with which to model the human
mind. Can we evaluate psychological issues in terms of CO
mechanisms? Will we be able to test treatment alternatives and
methodologies, or maybe even understand the nature of such things
as mind, emotion, and even consciousness? We think so.
Suitable ensembles are in fact everywhere. We have already pointed
out the link between quantum information science and CO
technology. We can identify an ensemble of photons using phase
angle as the unifying variable. The recognition of this ensemble
behavior is in fact what led us into quantum information science.
But photons are not the only suitable ensembles. Electrons and other
particles also have suitable bounded variables under the right
conditions. What can correlithm object technology reveal to us
about systems based on photons or electrons? What applications
might emerge? Does this ensemble behavior help us as electronic
devices enter the scale where quantum effects dominate? Are there
applications that involve light or lasers? Are there any benefits for
the emerging field of nanotechnology? We think so.
Does DNA fit with CO technology? If living neural systems make
use of high-dimensional statistical objects, might that same
mechanism show up in other parts of a living creature? Each
component of a DNA string can be one of four things. Thus a DNA
string is composed of four-valued or two-bit elements. If we treat a
DNA pattern as a point in an N-cube where each dimension can take
on only four values, CO statistics will emerge. In fact, the entire
DNA string is a huge N-cube, where each of the N dimensions has 4
194 Correlithm Object Technology
possible values.. A particular type of DNA can be represented as a
single point in the N-cube, one that represents the organism. A
living cell is itself a type of computer that utilizes DNA as its
primary program. Will CO technology provide any new possibilities
in DNA and living cell research? We think so.
Other fields also present suitable ensembles. Sociology is one
example. Consider an ensemble of people. Suppose we choose a
particular spectrum of opinion as our ensemble variable. Each
person will hold a particular (and possibly time-varying) opinion at
some strength within that spectrum. The ensemble of such people
defines a correlithm object in the corresponding space. The opinions
of people influence the opinions of other people. Thus, mappings of
COs are occurring all the time in human populations. Can we then
model a kind of group mind across human ensembles and make
predictions from that model20? We think so.
Conclusions
In this book, we have attempted to introduce some of the major
concepts of correlithm object technology. This is evidently a vast
field, because the deeper we go in any particular direction, the more
we turn up interesting results and additional possibilities. We feel
that correlithm object technology is at the point today where
computer science was in the late 1940s. But technology
development has accelerated since then. We do not believe that it
will take a half-century for correlithm object technology to mature.
Correlithm object technology may well be “the other computer
industry.” There are vast differences in the information processing
capabilities of living neural systems and traditional computers.
Neither is particularly good at tasks the other does well. The theory
presented in this book is a model of macroscopic information
representation, storage, and manipulation in living neurons that is
based on very simple first principles. Properties emerge that are very
much akin to properties observed in living organisms. The theory is

20 We cannot resist pointing out the parallels between this concept and the
“psychohistory” described by Isaac Asimov in his Foundation Trilogy.
Chapter XI Directions 195
simple and elegant. Many people find it very satisfying. And it
produces insights and predictions that not only can be tested and
verified, but also lead directly to engineering implementations that
do new and useful things. We think that correlithm object
technology will usher in a major new direction for information
processing systems, namely systems that behave more like living
creatures than machines. We call this direction “the other computer
industry.”
Whether or not we are right that correlithm object technology
“explains” how the brain works, the fact remains that it has already
produced many new and powerful concepts. Correlithm object
technology provides a strong theoretical foundation that can be used
to make progress in many diverse directions. We have already begun
to explore these new worlds.
And there is no end to them in sight!
Correlithm Object Technology
197
Appendix I Derivation of Unit NCube Distances
Random Point to Random Point
The Problem
Find analytic expressions for the mean and standard deviation of a
variable, Z, the Cartesian distance between two points selected at
random within a unit N-cube.
The Solution
While closed-form expressions for the mean and standard deviation
of Z as a function of N remain elusive, we can obtain good
expansions.
Note that:
∑=
=
N
i
Z Vi
1
2
where the Vi are copies of random variables V:
2 V = (X1− X 2)
with X1 and X2 uniform independent initial deviates on [0,1]. We
have:
( 1)(2 1)
1 ( ) ( )
1
0
1
0
2
+ + = − = ∫ ∫ m m
E V x y dxdy m m
for all positive integers m. In particular,
198 Correlithm Object Technology
6 [ ] [ ] 2 N E Z = N E Z =
Thus, if we knew the mean, the variance would be easy:
[ ] 6
2 2 E Z N
σ = −
For an approximation to E[Z], write the ansatz,
(1 ) 6
2 Y N Z = −
where:
6 2 1 Z
N
Y = −
Then:


 

 = − = − − − − + [ ] 128
5
2 8 16
1
6
1
6
5
2 3 4
O y
N y y y y Y N Z
Now we can get E[Ym] for positive integers m
 from the exponential generating function,
N t V t N
Z tY N E[e ] E[e ]e E[e ] e
6 2 6 − −
= =
where according to Mathematica:
Appendix I Derivation of Unit N-cube Distances 199
( ) 1
( 1)!(2 1)
[ ]
1
1
0
1
0
( )
2
erfi s
s s
e
s
m m
s
E e e dxdy
s m
m
sV s x y
π = − +
+ + =
=
∑
∫ ∫
∞
=
−
In particular, we expand the series, collect terms in powers of Y and
multiply by 1/n! to remove the exponential generating function
coefficients, yielding:
N
E Y
5
7 [ ]
2 = 2
3
35
88 [ ] N
E Y =
3
4
175
3(343 202) [ ] N
N E Y + =
with the higher-order terms O(1/N3
). Thus, we get:
)] 1 ( 440
51
2240
1853
896
65
40
7 [1
6 [ ] 2 3 4 5 N
O
N N N N
N E Z = − − + + +
and:
) 1 ( 331161600
4385371
1324646400
113938733
107520
30103
33600
641
120
7
4 5
2 3
2
N
O
N
N N N
+ +
σ = + − +
As N tends to infinity, we can ignore higher order terms, and we
have:
200 Correlithm Object Technology
6 [ ] N E Z = and
120
7
σ = .
Random Point to Midpoint
The Problem
Find analytic expressions for the mean and standard deviation of a
variable, Z, the Cartesian distance between a point selected at
random and the midpoint within a unit N-cube.
The Solution
The derivation proceeds along the same lines as the one above. The
resulting expansions for the mean and variance are:
)] 1 ( 55
3
140
17
280
13
10
1 [1
12 [ ] 2 3 4 5 N
O
N N N N
N E Z = − − + − +
and
) 1 ( 2587200
79
2069760
22633
16800
353
4200
29
60
1
4 5
2 3
2
N
O
N
N N N
+ +
σ = + − +
yielding the following as N goes to infinity:
12 [ ] N E Z = and
60
1
σ = .
Random Point to Corner
The Problem
Find analytic expressions for the mean and standard deviation of a
variable, Z, the Cartesian distance between a random point and any
corner within a unit N-cube.
Appendix I Derivation of Unit N-cube Distances 201
The Solution
Again, the derivation is similar. The expansions for the mean and
variance are:
)] 1 ( 55
3
140
17
280
13
10
1 [1
3 [ ] 2 3 4 5 N
O
N N N N
N E Z = − − + − +
and
) 1 ( 646800
79
517440
22633
4200
353
1050
29
15
1
4 5
2 3
2
N
O
N
N N N
+ +
σ = + − +
yielding the following as N goes to infinity:
3 [ ] N E Z = and
15
1
σ =
Correlithm Object Technology
203
Appendix II Correlithm Objects
and Neurophysiology
Overview
Correlithm Object (CO) technology provides a framework for
understanding the functionality of living neural systems. The
dynamic state of a neuron is the time-varying rate of pulses found
on its axon. The state of a group of N neurons can be viewed as a
point in a unit N-cube. CO technology teaches that such points, or
COs, have unique properties. COs are the primary tokens used to
represent data in living neural systems. Important tokens are stored
in the synapses as CO pairings that capture the state CO of one
group of neurons with respect to the state CO of another at a
particular time. These pairings cause the instantiation of a CO in one
group of cells to instantiate the corresponding CO in another. The
model is Turing complete, capable of learning from experience, and
incredibly robust. It exhibits many properties that are uncommon in
traditional computers but widespread in living information
processing systems.
Representing Information
The state of a neuron is its pulse rate, which is a time-varying,
continuous, bounded variable. The minimum pulse rate is zero
pulses per second. The maximum is about 200 pulses per second in
mammalian neurons. These bounds can be taken as zero and one
without loss of generality. The information in pulses is therefore real
and continuous, not digital. We can represent the state of a neuron at
time t as a coordinate on the real number line in the interval zero to
one.
The state of a group of N neurons at time t is a set of coordinates
that define a point in a unit N-cube. We call such points Correlithm
Objects, or COs.
204 Correlithm Object Technology
COs are the primary tokens of information representation in living
neural systems.
Storing Information
Information is stored as COs in a cell’s input dendritic tree. Each
input cell tries to impose a particular pulse rate on the output cell,
but not necessarily its own pulse rate. There is a learned functional
relationship that can be visualized as isolated “spots” on a
photographic film. (See Figure AII-1.)
Input Pulse Rate
Output
Pulse
Rate
min
max
max
min
Figure AII-1 The dendritic tree captures (learns) a functional relationship
that relates the pulse rate of each input cell to a “nominated” pulse rate for
the output cell. The relationship is sparse and typically non-linear. Spot size
reflects synaptic strength.
The input cell strongly influences the output cell only on or near
these spots. When the input cell’s pulse rate intersects a spot, the
corresponding output pulse rate will be “nominated.” The strength
of the nomination is proportional to the size of the spot, which
reflects synaptic conductivity. (Spots are actually modeled as 2D
Gaussians.)
The aggregate of the input nominations from all of the input cells
determines the pulse rate that the output cell adopts. Each nominated
Appendix II Correlithm Objects and Neurophysiology 205
value, weighted by the connecting “spot,” is combined to produce a
weighted average. The current pulse rate of the output cell is
combined with the weighted average and noise to produce
(continuously) the new pulse rate for the output cell.
In effect, the CO in the input cells is compared to stored COs and
their paired output values to produce the output cell’s new pulse
rate. (See Figure AII-2.)
…
Various Input
Pulse Rates
A Single
Output Pulse Rate.
Figure AII-2 At the time a CO is stored, the input pulse rates may be any
values. These values are paired with the current output pulse rate to
determine the location of each of the spots. When all or most of those input
pulse rates are again present, each spot will nominate the same output value.
206 Correlithm Object Technology
A Closer Look
A conical neuronal membrane, such as a tapering dendrite, acts as a
spatial pulse rate analyzer. (See Figure AII-3.) It is well known that
in a tubular neuronal membrane, the maximum sustainable pulse
rate is directly proportional to the diameter of the tube. A conical
membrane, therefore, conducts pulses of a particular rate without
attenuation until the diameter of the cone drops below the point
where that rate can be sustained. Pulses do not pass far beyond that
point because the membrane is in relapse. So a dendrite analyzes its
pulse rate spatially. In its conical membrane there is a region of
conduction, a region of transition, and a region of cutoff. Slow
pulses travel nearly to the small end of the dendrite, rapid pulses die
out in the big end with pulses of in-between rates expiring at inbetween locations. (See Figure AII-4.) The position of the transition
region directly reflects the pulse rate.
High Rates Stop Here
Mid Rates Stop Here
Low Rates Stop Here
Conical Membrane
Figure AII-3 A conical membrane maps pulse rate to physical position.
Maximum pulse rate is proportional to membrane diameter. Small diameters
can support only low rates, so only low rates penetrate to the end of the cone.
High rates are supported only at the large end, and middle rates fall in
between.
Appendix II Correlithm Objects and Neurophysiology 207
Conduction Cutoff
Transition
Figure AII-4 There are three regions of conical membrane response to a
given pulse rate, the conduction region where all pulses pass, the cutoff
region where no pulses pass, and a transition region in between.
A synapse only effectively transmits if its input originates in a
dendrite’s transition region. At any given time, synapses distributed
along a dendrite find themselves in one of the three regions. At the
small end, or cutoff region of the dendrite, there is not enough signal
available to allow the synapses to cause pulses in the target dendrite.
These synapses are effectively in a cutoff condition. At the large
end, or conduction region of the dendrite, there is so much signal
available that the target dendrite cannot remove the transmitter
substance fast enough, and no pulses are produced in the target. It is
only in the small transition region of the dendrite that synapses
transmit effectively. This means that only a small percentage of all
synapses are actually transmitting at any given instant in time. (See
Figure AII-5.)
208 Correlithm Object Technology
Synapses Only These Transmit
Figure AII-5 Most synapses are not transmitting effectively. In the cutoff
region of the conical membrane, there is too little signal to drive the synapses.
In the conduction region, there is too much. Only in the transition region do
synapses pass signals.
An active synapse stimulates its target membrane to pulse at the rate
corresponding to the target membrane’s diameter, regardless of
what pulse rate drives the synapse. This means that a synapse can
interface any source membrane pulse rate to any target membrane
pulse rate. (See Figure AII-6.)
Referring back to Figure AII-1, the only synapses that are
conductive are the ones in the “spot” regions. The spot’s location
tells us what input rate it takes to produce what output rate, and its
size tells us how able the synapses in that region are to impose the
target rate on the target membrane.
The overall effect of this dendrite-synapse arrangement is to allow a
cell to store a CO comprised of the pulse rates cells it watches,
paired with a particular pulse rate for the cell itself. Later, when the
watched cells produce a similar CO, then the cell takes on a value
near the one it paired with the original CO. When a set of target cells
Appendix II Correlithm Objects and Neurophysiology 209
all watch the same source cells, the effect is to causally relate the
CO in the source cells to a corresponding CO in the target cells.
Medium Rate In
Low Rate Out
Target Membrane
Source Membrane
Figure AII-6 A synapse can carry any source rate to any target rate. Here a
medium rate in the source membrane activates synapses that stimulate a low
rate region of the target membrane. The source membrane’s transition
region determines which synapses are active. The location where those
synapses connect to the target membrane determines what pulse rate will be
produced.
Learning involves changing the conductivity of synapses. For a cell
to retain the CO it currently receives, it increases the conductivity of
(only) the currently active synapses. This produces the spots that
pair the incoming CO with the current cell pulse rate. The learning
process is probably mediated chemically.
Manipulating Information
Neurons manipulate information by mapping correlithm objects to
correlithm objects. A neuron “watches” the CO or output of an
ensemble of neurons. It compares that input CO with COs stored in
its input dendritic tree. It generates a new output pulse rate as a
function of the comparison. If the input CO is very close to a stored
CO, then the output pulse rate will be set very close to the rate that
was present on this cell’s output when that stored CO was captured.
210 Correlithm Object Technology
If several stored COs are close to the input CO, then the output pulse
rate is a weighted average of the corresponding stored outputs rates.
If there are no close COs, then the output pulse rate drifts in a
random walk.
The outputs of a set of cells form a CO. Each cell in a set watches
the CO in some particular set of input cells and sets its output pulse
rate accordingly. The aggregate of these output pulse rates is itself a
CO. Thus, an input CO is mapped to an output CO.
CO mapping is Turing complete. This is shown in Chapter VI.
The information processing characteristics of this process are
unique. We have illustrated these characteristics throughout this
book and argued that they are very similar to observed
characteristics of living neural systems.
Conclusion
We have presented a model of the information processing
characteristics of living neural systems. Data is represented by COs
in the pulse rates across ensembles of neurons. Data is stored by
associating COs with COs in the dendritic tree interface. Data is
manipulated by using the associations to map incoming COs to
outgoing COs.
We believe that this model should be studied, understood, and tested
by workers in the field. We think that it has much to offer.
Correlithm Object Technology
211
Glossary
actor:
a converter that maps world data to COs.
Behavior:
the way in which a CO system functions or operates.
bit content:
See “information content.”
bounded N-space:
a space of N dimensions wherein every possible straight line
is of finite length.
cardinal converter:
a set of rules that maps one-to-one between a cardinal set of
world objects and a set of same space COs.
cardinal objects:
a set of objects with no order or relationship other than set
membership.
cell:
storage for the coordinate value of one dimension in a CO
machine. “Cell” and “dimension” are often used
interchangeably, but a dimension has no storage.
CO:
See correlithm object.
CO computing paradigm:
an approach to computation that represents data using highdimensional points from bounded N-spaces and manipulates
data by following known pathways that connect these points.
212 Correlithm Object Technology
CO field:
the region of space near a CO. Also called a zone of
influence.
CO machine:
the computing machine implied by the CO computing
paradigm, used for both theoretical and practical work.
CO system:
a computational structure that uses COs.
complementary error function:
expresses the integral of the “tails” of the normal distribution
(which is the normalized form of the Gaussian function).
concurrency:
a property of computing machines that allows more than one
process to operate or occur at the same time.
continuous converter:
a set of rules that maps between a continuous world variable
and a string CO.
converter:
means to get world data into and out of a CO system.
correlithm:
1 (Mathematics) Any systematic method for solving
problems by using similarities to known examples.
2 (Computing) An algorithm primarily based on the use of
characterizing examples.
correlithm object:
a point in a high-dimensional bounded space.
Glossary 213
correlithm object machine:
a tuple (c,r), where c is a set of n cells, {ci , i = 1..n}, and r is
a set of k rules, {rj , j = 1..k}.
ensemble:
a group of N objects where each has a particular value of a
property, and taken together the values can be viewed as the
coordinates of a point in a bounded N-space.
erfc:
See Complementary Error Function
fires:
a term used to describe one iteration of the execution of a
rule.
full ply:
the set of all of the dimensions defined in a CO system. Also
called a full space.
full space:
the set of all of the dimensions defined in a CO system. Also
called a full ply.
geometric probability:
a field of study that focuses on the probabilities involved in
geometric problems.
googol:
in mathematics, one followed by one hundred zeroes
Hamming distance:
the sum of the lengths of the straight lines that must be
traversed in each dimension of an N-space to go between any
two points. In a binary space, the number of bits that differ.
214 Correlithm Object Technology
information content:
the number of bits of information corresponding to an event
with probability p(x), namely –log2(p(x)). Also called “bit
content.”
inner product:
the sum of the element-wise product of two vectors. Also
called “scalar product.”
ladder:
a general model for arbitrary behaviors in CO systems that
incorporates input, state, and context in the components of a
hierarchical structure.
lobe:
a grouping of rules for use in hierarchical composition.
mechanism:
a CO program, comprised of a set of rules, which runs on a
CO machine; or more generally, a way of writing rules to
obtain a particular behavior.
midpoint:
a halfway point, particularly the center of a unit N-cube,
which is a point that is equally distant from all of the Ncube’s corners.
N-cube:
a cube having N dimensions.
N-hedron:
a term used in this book to describe the set of points in a
bounded N-space that are mutually about the same distance
apart. Also called an N-sphere.
N-space:
a space having N dimensions.
Glossary 215
N-sphere:
a term used in this book to describe the set of points in a
bounded N-space that are mutually about the same distance
apart. Also called an N-hedron.
N-torus:
a torus having N dimensions.
name:
a textual label that provides a means for referring to a
particular space or point.
ordinal converter:
a set of rules that maps between an ordered set of world
objects and a string CO.
ordinal objects:
a set of objects that have a particular order, such as the
alphabet.
orthogonal basis vectors:
a set of linearly independent vectors in the same space.
pattern CO:
a known point in a space.
part:
a re-usable subsystem or set of rules defined as a single
object.
pattern point:
a known point that is used as a reference point or
“landmark.”
ply:
a set of dimensions; a space or subspace.
216 Correlithm Object Technology
point:
a set of coordinates that defines a location in a space or
subspace. Often used interchangeably with CO.
point capacity:
the number of points that we can select at random and still be
essentially certain that no two of them will be closer together
than distance d.
probability of proximity:
the probability that two points selected at random lie no
further than distance d apart.
pulse rate:
the number of pulses per unit time.
quantized converter:
a converter that treats world data as having only specific
values.
random corner:
a corner of an N-cube that is selected at random.
random point:
a point of an N-cube that is selected at random.
real unit N-cube:
a unit N-cube where all points have coordinates that are
drawn from the real numbers.
rule:
a directed line segment from a set of soft tokens called the
source to a set of soft tokens called the target, or the coding
of such a set. Rules perform all data manipulation in the CO
computing paradigm.
rule execution:
the process by which a rule is evaluated.
Glossary 217
rule notation:
a particular formalism for writing the rules of a CO system.
rule operator:
the 2-character symbol that separates the source side and the
target side of a rule. The symbol is either “>:” or “:<”, and its
arrow points to the target side.
sampled rule:
a rule whose points have coordinates that are subsets of the
coordinates of the points of another rule. A sampled rule is a
“lower resolution version” of another rule.
sensor:
a converter that maps world data to COs.
soft token:
a CO that is representing data.
source:
the portion of a rule that specifies what must be matched.
space:
specifically, the set of dimensions that host all subspaces of a
CO system. But space and subspace are often used
interchangeably.
stack machine:
a computational formalism comprised of a state machine
together with a stack or first-in-last-out memory system.
standard diameter:
the expected distance through the midpoint between two
randomly selected points in the same space or subspace.
Also, twice the standard radius.
218 Correlithm Object Technology
standard distance:
the expected distance between two randomly selected points
in the same space or subspace.
standard radius:
the expected distance between the midpoint and a randomly
selected point in the same space or subspace.
state CO:
the current coordinate values found in a set of cells or the
equivalent point in the corresponding space or subspace.
State COs vary with time.
state machine:
a computational formalism whose only memory system is a
current status or “state.”
state point:
a state CO.
straddler:
any CO system that is running on a concurrent computing
resource.
string:
short for string CO.
string CO:
a set of COs with a lower-dimensional geometric
relationship that is reflected in their mutual distances in the
space or subspace in which the COs are defined.
subply:
a ply, particularly one that is identifiably a subset of a ply
with more dimensions.
Glossary 219
subspace:
a space, particularly one that is identifiably a subset of a
space with more dimensions.
superposition:
a property or condition of a CO system where multiple rules
execute concurrently and correctly in the same space. Also, a
term for a situation where a set of COs in a space are
combined to form a single CO that carries the data carried by
each of the set members and can simultaneously and
independently function for each of them.
swarm:
a type of straddler where the components of the concurrent
computing resource are physically mobile in the world, in
the manner of a swarm of insects.
swarm mind:
the behavior of a CO system that is running on a swarm.
symmetric bounded N-space:
a bounded N-space whose origin is located at the midpoint of
the space.
Synthorg®:
a CO system, especially one that includes converters as well
as COs. Lawrence Technologies LLC owns this trademark.
target:
the portion of a rule that specifies what is to be generated.
term:
an element of the source or target of a rule that specifies a
particular point in a particular space or subspace.
unit edge:
a normalization of an N-cube where each edge has unit
length. See unit radius.
220 Correlithm Object Technology
unit N-cube:
a cube of N dimensions with each edge of unit length.
unit radius:
a normalization of an N-cube where standard radius has unit
length. See unit edge.
world:
anything considered to be outside—or in the environment—
of a CO system.
world data:
data considered to be outside—or in the environment—of a
CO system.
zone of influence:
the region of space near a CO. Also called a CO field.
Correlithm Object Technology
221
INDEX
A
actor, 52, 119, 120, 122, 124, 127, 132,
133, 154, 156, 166, 174, 175, 176,
211
analog, 96, 100, 105, 106, 107, 108,
123, 163, 186
anomaly detection, 188
Aristotle, 81
artificial neural network, 4, 73, 171,
172, 186
attractor, 77, 148, 150, 151, 152, 161
attractor well, 77
axon, 182, 203
B
bees, 97, 105, 185
binary, 22, 58, 112, 135, 137
bit content, 27, 31, 32, 211
Boolean logic, 75, 76
brain, 5, 98, 116, 132, 133, 195
C
cardinal converter, 122, 124, 125
chair, 81, 134, 135
clusters, 100
CO architecture, 69, 73
CO computing paradigm, vii, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42, 45, 47, 50, 52, 53, 63,
112, 133, 134, 151, 163, 171, 178,
184, 211, 216
CO field, 45, 212, 220
CO machine, 57, 59, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75,
96, 100, 104, 109, 132, 133, 158,
170, 172, 211, 212
coffee, 106
complement, 41, 75
complementary error function, 29, 30,
212
completeness, 69, 75
complex, 2, 5, 22, 40, 53, 54, 58, 83, 87,
96, 101, 106, 108, 112, 130, 144,
151, 157, 170, 178, 184, 186, 189,
191
complex numbers, 40, 112, 191
computing resource, 5, 97, 99, 105, 118,
190
concurrency, 99, 100, 103, 104, 105,
146, 151, 162, 163, 172, 185, 190,
212
concurrent, 97, 99, 100, 102, 105, 116,
118, 152, 159
cone, 46, 93, 94, 112, 206
confidence, ix, 47, 132, 139
Connectionism, 73
context free grammars, 152
Context sensitive grammars, 152
continuous systems, 163, 186
converter, 52, 53, 55, 119, 120, 121,
122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128,
129, 145, 176, 211, 212, 217, 219
Cyrillic, 90, 91, 92
D
data fusion, 80, 141, 179, 185, 187
dendrite, 206, 207, 208
dendritic tree, 7, 204, 209, 210
differential equations, 106, 169
differentiator, 169
Digital Signal Processors, 97, 105
DNA, 193
DSP, 97, 100, 105
E
ebits, 58
emergent statistical property, 116
English, 90, 91, 92
environment, 9, 104, 105, 133, 152, 176,
189, 220
erfc, 29, 30, 213
error correction, 137
error detection, 137, 138
expert system, 4, 160, 161, 162, 186
F
face, 79, 82, 83, 91, 139, 174
feedback control systems, 163, 170
feedback loop, 53, 152
222 Correlithm Object Technology
Field Programmable Gate Array, 100,
105
finite automata, 152
flip-flop, 75, 76, 78, 115, 116, 153, 163,
183
floor, 65, 165, 166, 167, 174
formal cause, 81
formal grammars, 48, 145, 152
fovea, 85, 86
foveal spot, 85
FPGA, 100, 105
frequency division multiple access, 113
function generation, 142, 143, 150, 151
functional relationships, 108, 163
fuzzy logic, 4, 172, 173, 186, 188
G
generation tree, 147, 149
geometric probability, 9, 10, 25, 90, 183,
213
geometrical characteristics, 81, 82
googol, 2, 213
grid, 95, 97
Grid computing, 100
group mind, 5, 97, 185, 194
H
Hamming distance, 9, 10
hierarchical organization, 83
hierarchy, 82, 83, 84, 85, 96, 118
Hilbert space, 112, 191
hologram, 97, 113, 114, 115, 185
holographic, viii, 5, 97, 183, 185
human brain, 116
I
if-then-else system, 160
immunity, 115
information content, 27, 38, 110, 111,
152, 162
inner product, 19, 192
integer, 33, 40, 58, 80, 112, 167, 197,
198
integrator, 169, 170
Internal Control, 174
intersection, 41, 139
K
Klein bottle, 129
L
ladder, 149, 150, 151, 152
learning, 159, 175, 176, 177, 190, 203,
209
linear grammars, 152
lines, vii, 10, 39, 79, 93, 107, 127, 161,
200
Lobachevsky space, 130
Logical Completeness, 71
logical NOT, 41, 70
M
major diagonal, 9, 10, 15, 18
midpoint, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 40, 191, 192, 200, 218,
219
mind, 15, 21, 106, 116, 118, 144, 173,
189, 193
Mind/Body Problem, 178
Möbius strip, 129, 130
morph, 80
N
N-dimensional tetrahedron, 21
Neurophysiologists, 182
N-hedron, 21, 191, 214, 215
normal distribution, 26, 29
novelty detector, 177
N-torus, 23, 215
O
operation, 41, 57, 58, 59, 71, 101, 102,
110, 116, 118, 171, 174, 192
ordinality, 90, 127
orthogonal basis vectors, 19, 22, 192
overlap, 40, 113, 159, 184
P
parse tree, 145, 146
pattern COs, 45, 46, 60, 113
pattern generation, 25, 80, 82, 83
Index 223
pattern recognition, 4, 25, 83, 142, 150,
151, 181
PatternPoint, 64
Perceptron, 73, 74
point capacity, 27, 32, 216
point of view, 98, 114, 151
popcorn, 97
probability of proximity, 26, 28, 30, 31,
32, 33, 216
productions, 48, 145
pulse rate, 6, 7, 182, 192, 203, 204, 205,
206, 207, 208, 209, 210
Pythagorean theorem, 2
Q
quantization, 167, 168
Quantum Information Science, 5, 22, 58,
191, 193
qubits, 58
R
random corner, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18
rational, 58
reinforcement learning, 176, 190
relative location, 84, 85, 86, 91, 92
resolution, 114, 115, 118, 161, 185
Riemann space, 130
robot, 179, 188
robustness, viii, 97, 115, 163, 184, 185
rule-based systems, 160
S
sags, 95
sampled rule, 109, 110, 217
sampling, viii, 86, 97, 109, 110, 111,
113, 127, 134, 168, 185
sensor, 52, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125,
126, 132, 133, 156, 159, 166, 188,
217
serial, 99, 105
sets of points, 79
shooting gallery, 43
simulation, 106, 152
speech center, 116
stack, 152, 154, 155, 156, 158, 159, 217
stack machine, 152, 154, 217
state CO, 46, 60, 100, 113, 122, 125,
126, 127, 203, 218
State CO, 218
state machine, 152, 153, 154, 155, 157,
170, 175
statistical landmark, 3
straddler, 105, 115, 118, 185, 186, 218
superposed, 111, 112, 113, 127, 152,
159
superposition, viii, 97, 111, 112, 113,
139, 140, 141, 146, 151, 152, 159,
161, 162, 163, 172, 185, 219
surfaces, vii, 79, 107, 127
swarm, 5, 97, 104, 118, 185
synthetic organism, 104, 133, 181
synthorg, 132, 133
T
Target Cell Independence, 63
thought processes, 178
thread, 99
tools, 44, 105, 181, 187, 188, 189, 190
topology, 130
tube, 96, 130, 206
tunnel, 141, 142
Type Zero grammar, 152
U
union, 41
unitarity constraint, 191
V
virtual digital computer, 115, 116, 117
vision center, 116
volumes, vii, 79, 80
Von Neumann architecture, 69
W
world data, viii, 52, 55, 119, 120, 127,
145, 211, 212, 217, 220
Z
zone of influence, 45, 46, 212, 220 